          Digitized by the Internet Archive
                       in 2024




https://archive.org/details/dikimanerasocial0000alle
Di ki manera?   oa
                     —
         Di ki manera?
A Social History of Afro-Curacaoans,
             1863-1917




              Rose Mary Allen
Di ki manera?
A Social History of Afro-Curacaoans, 1863-1917
Rose Mary Allen


ISBN 978 90 6665 851 6
NUR 740




© 2007 SWP Publishers, Amsterdam
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form without the written permission
of SWP Publishers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to
                                                                                                          this
publication may be liable to prosecution and civil claims for damages.
Contents


EN                         ea arsut Aayseths    Get ee    sie               le       eae    a Oe ec        405 7

PSE EON             erased oR            teen         Ie          a   Ae      ees Le       OW            aes 9

II. A Methodology of Afro-Curagaoan History: Archival and Oral Sources                             ........ dl

III. Afro-Curagaoan Life and Culture Prior to Emancipation                       …                              63

IV. Celebrating Freedom: The Abolition of Slavery on Curacao                         ………...........……. 101

V. The Role of the State and the Plantation Owners after Emancipation                            ......... 119

VI. The Roman Catholic Church’s Effort to Instill Respectability ............... 147

Wiser     bug                a Lavine rn. Arre                ee EEE                                          177

NSB       iu Bida Drechi Living a Respectable Lifewwe.                     ss. an. vore     ega         haat 215

De lami at pido An Atro-Curacaoan Concept of Life .. x, sss                          os oie Aes         eee 235

m Conclusions Survival and Cultural Complexity:                       24.0.3 cea. ccs               noms oes 257

Archival Records: Oral Documents-and Bibliography                     nar sours
                                                                             Daceese 265

ANDEREN               aN     er eh wh ENSa lars avo       er                   A          Dee      okey CUES 289

SamMetVateIG   eeaen MeN       Ine PON         AD                      BEEN               ER            e oiel 295

RESUME     EE         EI                   elaad ha a,ohana            A     leeren                Skits als 299

Curriculum aen                       EN          BENE         A        A                   REE     ee    eee 303
          ~




                           —                                     7                          a

                                        a
                                                                                      are
                                               =                                                  a

     al          len                                         a            i      }     1e              n

                                                                                 el


                                                   in       9498          ieee        {hs         7 =
                                                        ;                                   av.

               it)         pens ~                       ae           e@       AS                  po

                       7                                                                    a
my            ee           ee           ee         vehi © an                            RS
                                         Kan        ;                     oe

                 vase pee                      inka
                                    0
Acknowledgements

After the completion of this thesis, I want to express my deep gratitude to a great number
of people. First of all I am grateful to all the elderly respondents, most of whom are no
longer alive, who willingly gave me their valuable information. Masha danki pa tur e infor-
mashon. In addition, I want to thank the government of the Netherlands Antilles, that
through the Institute of Archeology and Anthropology (AAINA) directed at the time by
drs. E. Ayubi, provided institutional support and played an important role in supporting
the research of oral history.
     I am also deeply indebted to my supervisor prof.dr. Gert Oostindie, whose consistent
dedication and commitment to the study helped me during the many years of researching
and writing. Furthermore I am very grateful to dr. Inge Klinkers who corrected the Eng-
lish of the thesis with admirable dedication and skill. Lucille Haseth gave her all to correct
the narratives and songs in Papiamentu and to provide the translation in Papiamentu of
the summary.
    The completion and publication of this doctoral thesis was made possible by a grant
given by the late mrs. May Henriquez, a votary of culture par excellence. After her passing,
her children continued her life-work. The Prins Bernhard Cultuurfonds funded a large
part of the English correction, as well as the University of Utrecht and KITLV/Royal
Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Caribbean Studies in Leiden. NAAM
(National Archeologisch Antropologisch Museum of the Netherlands Antilles) financed
the translation of the summary in Papiamentu, the University of the Netherlands Antilles
co-funded the eventual publication.

In Curacao, I am indebted to several people who in one way or another helped me to devel-
op the thesis. First of all masha danki na Elis Juliana whose invaluable knowledge of
Curagaoan culture and history provided me with an insider’s view of Afro-Curagaoan soci-
ety and thus helped to improve the study. With Daphne van Schendel-Labega I could share
important reflections on the thesis. Masha dank: to her as well. Thanks to Felix Muizenberg,
Rubia Bitorina, Christel Monsanto, Luisette Sambo, Karin Wallace, Adaly Rodriguez, Berber
de Vries, Monique Emelina, Richard Doest, Elgenia Pieternella and Angelo La Cruz, who in
one way or another were of great significance along the way. Furthermore I should thank
Ellen Maduro, Mike Jacobs and Oswin Francinet of the Bureau of Statistics of the Nether-
lands Antilles who supported me with the statistical part of the study.
    Thanks to the Board Members of the NAAM for their continued interest in the study.
With NAAM’s director Ieteke Witteveen I engaged in stimulating intellectual discussions
which provided many valuable insights. Many thanks also to the staff of the National
Archives of Curacao, who gave themselves wholeheartedly when I requested their help. The
same gratitude must be extended to the staff of the Caribiana department of the Library
Fundashon Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou, in particular to Lianne Leonora. My gratitude also
goes to the staff of the Mongui Maduro Library and to the staff of the Library of the Uni-
versity of the Netherlands Antilles.
Parts of the manuscript were discussed with dr. Kevin Dawson, dr. Judith Carney, dr. Rivke
Jaffe and dr. Maureen Warner Lewis, who gave valuable feedback on the thesis. Dr. Alan
Benjamin provided much support and encouragement. He read the manuscript of the the-
sis with a critical eye as well, and offered valuable advice and comments. I should also
thank Jeanine Evers, dr. Jay Haviser, Ernest Gaari and Emy Maduro for reading the manu-
script of the thesis very critically and offering valuable advice and comments.
     In the Netherlands many people also supported me. To begin with, Han Jordaan, who
provided invaluable guidance in the research of archival documents. Furthermore I am
indebted to dedicated staff of the library of the KITLV, Rini Hogewoning and Josephine
Schrama and especially to Irene Rolfes of Caribbean Studies whose enthusiasm in helping
out was far beyond the call of duty. At KITLV, I also had stimulating discussions with Liza
de Laat on our shared research interests.

On a personal note, I am indebted to my friend Bart ten Broek for instilling in me the
fighting spirit to continue against all odds. My friends Jeanine Evers, Ingrid den Heijer-
Bodeutsch, Ernest Gaari, Adeline Jones and Swinda Philippus demonstrated their deep
friendship and provided much encouragement.
    Finally, I want to thank my sons, Kwame and Amilcar, and my eleven sisters and bro-
thers for their love and support.
CHAPTER I
Introduction




In this study I will present the key factors determining the social and cultural life of Afro-
Cura¢aoans during the first fifty years after the abolition of slavery in 1863. I will do so
through a socio-cultural analysis of the social system of which they formed part. Their posi-
tion within slave society will be the starting point, followed by an evaluation of the two
principle elements of social control after emancipation: the State and the Roman Catholic
Church. Rather than viewing Afro-Curagaoans as mere objects to be acted upon, in this
analysis I cite them as resilient agents, rising to — and often resisting in a variety of ways —
the challenges and restrictions they faced in a free society. Their resilience and resistance are
best demonstrated through the factors from which they drew their sustenance; these being
mainly their social networks — such as families, peer groups, co-workers, local communities
— and their culture, brought to the fore, for example, in their songs, stories and rituals.
     This thesis will put forward a historical study of post-abolition social and cultural life
of Afro-Curagaoans within the context of the late nineteenth-century Curagaoan socio-
economic system. It thus looks at their social and cultural life from a historical perspective
and in doing so it combines history and anthropology. Anthropologists have been known
to study the culture of non-western people through extensive fieldwork, documenting the
ethnographic present of societies.’ Anthropology has therefore often been criticized for its
a-historical approach. At the moment historical anthropology, an interdisciplinary
exchange between anthropology and history, tries to fill this void. And there are more stud-
ies focusing on social change within society and on the role socially marginalized people
play in these processes of change (Burke 1996:49). In the past three decades anthropolo-
gists studying the Caribbean have joined historians and specialists in creole languages and
literature to analyse how ordinary people in this region have experienced the processes of
culture brought about by colonization, slavery, indenture and neocolonialism (Besson
2002:5-6).
    The title of this thesis, Di Ki Manera? (In Which Manner’), is also the title of a tradi-
tional song in which an enslaved person contemplates a world which denies him any
respect. In this context I use it to analyse how Afro-Curagaoans struggled in their day-to-
day lives after emancipation. Here, the lives of ‘those without history’ will be told (Wolf
1982). Due to the lack of written documents on this subject, I will also utilize oral infor-
mation. In addition I hope to illustrate through this approach how oral sources can be
applied to historical studies. Thus my goal is partly of a methodological nature.
    In attempting to gain insight into Afro-Curagaoan life after slavery, it is important to
look at change and continuity over time with regard to culture and to examine the role
Afro-Curacaoans played in this process of change. Of major significance to this study is the
view of culture and society as dynamic and subject to change. Curagaoan culture has
changed in complex ways over time, the abolition of slavery being a pivotal point in this
process. At the time of abolition freedmen and their offspring constituted around fifty per
cent of the island population.’ They were joined by a group of roughly 35 per cent of the
population who experienced life for the first time as free citizens (Oostindie 1995b:158;
1997:56). In this respect, Curacao differed from the rest of the Caribbean, where the pro-
portion of freedpeople was much lower prior to emancipation.’
     Caribbean historiography has rarely focused on life following this transformation.
Most studies have concentrated on slavery and have neglected freedom. With this they
have also neglected the role played by those manumitted in the processes of change (Eudell
2002:7; Cooper et al. 2000). This also applies to Curagaoan historiography, This study fol-
lows the cultural path through slavery and into freedom, and in this way aims to give a
more complete history. It examines the everyday life of Afro-Curacaoans in the period
between 1863, the year of emancipation, and 1917, the year of the first mass labour migra-
tion of Curacaoans to Cuba, with profound effects on the social structure of the island.
The end-date of my research is thus not 1915, the year in which the establishment of Shell
on the island triggered the beginnings of an industrialized society. The oil-refinery did not
have an immediate effect on the daily life of a large group of Afro-Curagaoans (van Soest
1977; Paula 1973).
     In this first Chapter I will lay out the theoretical framework of this study. After an
analysis of the way in which previous historical studies have viewed the lives of Afro-
Curagaoans, | will advocate a more historically oriented anthropological approach. “Cul-
ture’ will be a key concept in this socio-cultural analysis of life in post-emancipation soci-
ety. As this study aims to combine anthropology and history, I will look at several
theoretical concepts that have shaped the understanding of Caribbean culture and society.
     This analysis of Afro-Curagaoan culture and daily life during the first fifty years fol-
lowing emancipation necessitates the use of a wide range of sources. The complexity of the
Afro-Curacaoan past will be interpreted through oral testimonies, archival documents and
secondary sources. In Chapter II, I will assess the methodology and sources, both oral and
written, utilized in this study.
     Chapter III will examine and describe the daily life of Afro-Curacaoans before 1863.
Since this pre-emancipation period has determined many of the group’s characteristics, it
is vital to study this group before 1863. Here the main question is: ‘Who are we referring
to with the term “Afro-Curagaoans”?’ This social category is complex and varied. Afro-
Curagaoans have been distinguished according to their ancestral origins, gender, age, occu-
pation and area of domicile. But distinction has also been made according to whether a
person had been born on the island or had been transported there, and to whether they
were freed or enslaved. All these factors would determine their place in slave society and
how this was to continue or change in the post-emancipation period.
     Chapter IV focuses on the manner in which emancipation was perceived by those in con-
trol and by those gaining freedom. I will analyse how the perceptions of both groups would
influence the lives of the manumitted former slaves. Central in gaining an insight into these
perceptions are the speeches made and the songs sung on the day of emancipation.


10
In Chapters V and VI I will identify the different roles played by the authorities in their
attempts to mould the life patterns of Afro-Curacaoans during their first few decades of free-
dom. Chapter V places emphasis on the key concept of‘civilization’ and on how this has been
interpreted and applied by the State in its attempts to shape the Afro-Curagaoans as free citi-
zens — including those manumitted before 1863. Chapter VI will approach this issue from the
perspective of the Roman Catholic Church, with its emphasis on ‘civilization’ and
‘respectability’ and its attention directed to social spheres such as sexuality and family life.
     Chapters VII, VIII and IX will examine the range and complexity of the actual lives of
Afro-Curacaoans arising from the interventions by the State and the Church. In this the-
sis I will approach Afro-Curacaoan culture empirically, by examining three central aspects
of their everyday lives: the economic, the social and the spiritual. Using the concept of bida
in these three Chapters, I will focus on the dynamics of their material, social and spiritual
lives. Bida simply means life. This concept is, however, often used in connection with the
different aspects of people’s daily lives.
     In Chapter VII I will first address the material (economic) dimension, as expressed in
the term ‘buska bida’ In 1863 Afro-Cura¢aoans had the option to either continue or
change their socio-economic situation. The possibilities open to them were similar to
those freed before emancipation; they could continue in certain types of work, to which
other jobs were added. Although ‘buska bida’ encompasses all economic modes undertak-
en by people in order to make a living, it is not restricted to material existence. It is also
associated with the struggle for survival in a rigid hierarchical society where Afro-
Curacaoans, being the descendants of slaves, have inherited an inferior social status. In that
sense the term ‘buska bida’ also embodies the search for acceptance and recognition.
     Chapter VIII, Biba un Bida Drechi (Living a Respectable Life), addresses the Roman
Catholic Church’s quest to civilize Afro-Curacaoans, as described in Chapter VI. It focuses on
the ways in which people responded to the goals set by this institution. I will examine how
Afro-Curacaoans lived together and interacted as a couple or as individuals of either sex.
     Finally, in Chapter IX, Tambú di Bida (Drum of Life), I will analyse the beliefs through
which people attempted to explain their place in the world and their outlook on life. These
beliefs also determined the decisions people made on a day-to-day basis. Although initial-
ly I will address each of these three aspects of life in separate Chapters, they are related in
the Afro-Curacaoans’ struggle to make life bearable — there is thus an interrelationship
between material, social and spiritual life.
    In Chapter X I will summarize and conclude this thesis and reflect on the fundamen-
tal underlying ideas with regard to the life of Afro-Curacaoans in post-emancipation
Curacao. Emphasis will be placed on the model of cultural complexity and its manifesta-
tion in the Afro-Curacaoans’ everyday lives.



Historiography of Post-Emancipation Curacao
In a review of the historiography of the British Leeward Islands’ post-emancipation era
B.W. Higman (1995:10) divided this period into three main phases. During the first phase
the historiography was recorded by the writings of amateurs, who were either local


                                                                                             til
inhabitants or visitors. These amateurs were superseded in the second phase (first half of
the twentieth century) by professional historians from metropolitan Europe and the Unit-
ed States. The last phase began in 1950 and was characterized by the work of West Indian
professionals as well as by contributions from British and American scholars. Most of the
West Indian historians had studied at universities in their respective countries and offered
interesting alternatives to mainstream historical writing of the time, both in their perspec-
tives and methods.
     In some ways the historiography of Curacao runs parallel to that of the Anglophone
Leeward Islands, as they both evolved from amateurism to professionalism in this period
(Oostindie 1987; 1997:27).‘ Yet in other ways it presents a different historical panorama. In
contrast to the British Leeward Islands — where there has been a greater involvement by
local scholars — a large part of the studies on Curagaoan history is still produced by Dutch
historians (Oostindie and Hoefte 1999). The relatively small number of inhabitants when
compared to the British West Indies and the lack of an appropriate infrastructure on the
island impede local initiatives in this area.
    Nevertheless, the body of historical literature of Curacao has been growing steadily
over the past decades. The late twentieth-century developments in historiography in gen-
eral have been supported by scholars studying the history of Curagaoan society. Their
writings show a new orientation in the areas, the time covered and the subject matters.
There has also been an expansion in the fields of studies. This manifests itself particularly
in the focus on the manner in which the populace thought and behaved.
    Within the context of this new orientation, a more comprehensive study on how the
former slaves dealt with their lives after emancipation has become necessary. While in
other areas of the Caribbean studies of everyday life in the post-emancipation era are slow-
ly shedding their outdated interpretations, this is not yet the case for the Netherlands
Antilles. Here I will therefore seek to situate these studies within the context of the gener-
al historiography of Curacao.
    First of all I date the beginning of the post-emancipation historiography at 1863, the
year in which, as previously stated, the enslaved on Curacao were freed. Around the end of
the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century, post-emancipation literature
matched a current of thought in historiography which was overtly Eurocentric or, as the
historians De Jong, Prince and s’Jacob (1998) called it, ‘Netherlandocentric.’ Historiogra-
phy was essentially a narrative on Dutch activities in the Caribbean: it focused primarily
on Dutch explorations, the subsequent struggles and rivalry between the Netherlands and
other European powers, and the Netherlands’ final conquests in this area. This Eurocentric
approach was not only visible in the areas of study, but also in the questions raised and in
the interpretations made. At that time the model of the law of evolution, which sees social
change as a development in the stages from savagery to barbarism to civilization, was
applied to all areas of science. Differences in technological development were linked to dif-
ferences in intellectual capacities between races. In this concept of a racial hierarchy, blacks
were placed at the lowest level of development. The race issue was also applied to the his-
toriography of Curacao and several scholars interpreted themes such as slavery and its
abolition from this particular philosophical viewpoint (Oostindie 1995b:153-69).




12
These ideas are clearly present in the works of J.H.J. Hamelberg. Although not a profes-
sional historian, Hamelberg was considered a leading light of his time. He lived on the
island at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century and pub-
lished several studies (1895, 1896, 1901-1903a,      1901-1903b,    1903).° Hamelberg was a
major force behind the creation of a Society for History’, in which he played a pivotal role
once established. The Society would publish six reports but folded once he left for the
Netherlands.
     According to Hamelberg, blacks were not equal to whites. His publications on slaves
and former slaves clearly illustrate his ideas on racial and cultural inferiority. Hamelberg’s
convictions also came to the fore in Vragen van de dag (1895b), in which he stated that the
black popular class should not have the right to vote. In a different essay (1895a) he fur-
ther elaborated upon these views and cited the high number of babies born out of wed-
lock among blacks and their use of the Papiamentu language as hindrances in their devel-
opment. In many ways his ideas ran parallel to those of the English theologian Anthony
Trollope (1860) and the historian James Anthony Froude (1888), whose books reinforced
the stereotypes of the plantocracy in the British West Indies. Clearly, at that time these were
commonly held ideas regarding blacks in the Caribbean.
    Up until the mid-nineteen sixties the area of history receiving most attention by schol-
ars and laymen alike was that of colonial administration. The body of literature on this
subject is considerable.* The historiography on the islands was principally a description in
chronological terms, focusing on influential men.
    Interesting in this development of chronological historiography are the contributions
in the beginning of the twentieth century of local people such as Wein Hoyer and Nicolaas
van Meeteren.’ Because of the extensive documentation he held relating to Curacao, Hoyer
was approached whenever information on the island’s history was needed. He was also one
of the first historians to write in Papiamentu.” Van Meeteren, whose family (originally
from the Netherlands) had been on the island for three generations, was also seen as a
knowledgeable person regarding the island’s history.'' Both Hoyer and van Meeteren rep-
resented the interests of local people in their history. Their works, however, followed the
traditional concept of history as they represent descriptive accounts of events and focus on
powerful men.
      This trend continued in the in the mid-twentieth century with the writings of the pro-
fessional historian Johan Hartog. Not confining himself to political issues, Hartog covered
various other areas, thus disclosing a collection of facts from different archives in the
Netherlands and in the Netherlands Antilles. His works are encyclopedic in character, but
regretfully his large compilations of facts are not always sufficiently contextualized. Fur-
thermore, in Hartog’s works the populace is only fleetingly mentioned. In that sense he
perpetuates the traditional method of exploring history. Although his main study on
Curacao (2 vols. 1961) comprises 1109 pages, the Chapter on slavery and emancipation
consists of a meagre 34 pages. The rare mention of slaves throughout this book is exclu-
sively coupled to occasions where they pose a threat to the established order. The post-
emancipation period is almost entirely overlooked in Hartog's writings.
     Another current flowing through the historiography of Curacao, running parallel to pol-
itics, is that of the Roman Catholic Church — one of the earliest institutions to document the
history of the Netherlands Antilles. In addition to preaching the gospel to the black lower
classes, some priests published historical books and articles. Most of their writings came to
light at the beginning of the twentieth century. Priest-historians such as Petrus A. Euwens
and in the mid-fifties M.D. Latour and W.M. Brada, being prolific writers, penned numer-
ous publications.”
    Among these studies were biographies on leaders of the Catholic Church in the Dutch
Caribbean. For example, several life-histories were written on Martinus Niewindt, a priest
who had arrived on the island in 1824. When Niewindt became the first vicar apostolic in
1843, the Church intensified its mission on the Dutch islands. Niewindt introduced a mod-
ernized medical system and was active in improving education opportunities for child-
ren of the black popular class. His role in the local expansion of the Catholic Church has
been acknowledged in many forms." G.J.M. Dahlhaus (1924) is worthwhile mentioning in
this respect as he published some of Niewindt’s correspondences in one of his books.
    However, most of these studies undertaken by the clergy were descriptive evaluations
of the Roman Catholic missionary role in Antillean society and focused on the positive
contributions made by the Church in the development of the islands and the problems
they encountered. This corresponds with the Church’s ideas on the role history should play
in education. Historiography by priests is thus limited to the history of Christianity. This
vision — ‘History education should be the history of civilization, hence first of all the his-
tory of Christianity’ — is portrayed in several studies on the history of Curagao.
    Yet others have approached religious history from a different viewpoint. The late twen-
tieth-century publications by R.H. Nooyen, for example, do not only focus on religious
leaders but also on members of the popular class who played an important role in the
Catholic Church (Nooyen 1959, 1974, 1979, 1995). A more analytical study of missionary
work is Cornelis Goslinga (1956), in which the author discusses the numerous difficulties
faced by the Church when introducing Christianity to the slaves.
    Harry Hoetink’s dissertation, a sociological-historical study published in 1958, pio-
neered a new phase in the historiography of the Netherlands Antilles. To date, this book is
regarded as the standard work for social scientists and historians alike.® It represents a shift
toward sociology and reflects the rising interest in giving social questions a more histori-
cal perspective. It also marks the beginning of a conceptualization of the historical reality
of the island in sociological terms. Hoetink went beyond looking solely at events — as his-
torians had been doing previously — and examined the complex organization of
Curagaoan society before 1863. He looked at how colour, race and ethnic origin, as well as
the inherent powers, determined a person’s position in the social hierarchy. He examined
how this determined the ways in which ethnic groups lived — independently — as well as
how they interacted (I will elaborate on this later in this Chapter).
     With this, Hoetink laid the foundations for a better understanding of a society emer-
ging from slavery. In his following work (1962) he compared the bipolar race relations in
the British colonies to the far more flexible ones in the Spanish territories, in order to the-
orize on colour and race sensitivity in the Caribbean.'° Hoetink questioned whether race
relations and the nature of slave systems in the Caribbean were exclusively and uniformly
culturally determined. He substantiated his views in a comparison of slavery and race rela-
tions in Suriname and in Curagao. He also launched the concepts of ‘somatic norm image’


14
(the way in which several groups in Caribbean society valorize colour and race) and
‘somatic distance’, referring to how people experience differences between the valued
somatic features and their real physical appearance (Oostindie 1996).
    The Curacaoan sociologist René Römer would continue to stimulate the interest in
social issues in his dissertation (1979). He further examined the social changes on the
island over a period of four hundred years and sustained Hoetink’s theory that colour, race
and ethnicity were important determinants of one’s social position, both before and after
slavery. According to Römer, this only changed to some extent with industrialization. Due
to the consequent structural changes in Curacaoan society, colour and race became to a
lesser degree obstacles for social mobility.
    The rising interest in social and economic issues manifested itself in new studies using
models and paradigms drawn from scholarly traditions. Most of these works focused on
demography and economics        (Higman    1985-1986:3). J. van Soest (1977) addresses the
 macro socio-economic impact of the oil-refinery on twentieth-century Curacaoan socie-
 ty.” He also discusses the economic situation of post-emancipation society before the
 arrival of Shell, including the economic opportunities open to Afro-Curagaoans during
 that period.
     A rare demographic study was published by H.E. Lamur (1981), which quantifies and
 compares the birth rates of the slave population in the Netherlands Antilles and Suriname."
 W.E. Renkema (1981a) pursued the rising interest in economic questions and explored the
 range of economic activities on Curagaoan plantations in the nineteenth century through
 the use of primary sources, such as the property records of plantation owners. Even though
 he examined to some extent the owners’ powers with respect to pre- and post-emancipation
plantation life and looked at the barriers set up by them to obstruct the establishment of
black lower class communities in their neighbourhoods, he paid relatively little attention to
the development and the position of the peasantry on and outside of the plantations.”
      Jeroen Dekker (1982) compared the social situation on the island in the period before
and after the arrival of Shell in 1915. He used quantitative measures to analyse the demo-
graphic, economic and social processes taking place over a period of almost three decades.
Dekker drew on population records to reassess the validity of certain observations made
by previous scholars. He concurred that after the arrival of Shell, Curacao changed from
an agrarian-commercial society into a modern capitalistic industrial society with
improved socio-economic conditions and the possibility of upward social mobility. Based
on statistics, this study provides new insights into the social processes during the final
phase of the pre-industrial period.
     In the late twentieth-century religious historiography of the island a new process chal-
lenged the dominant views in this area. Some authors became more critical of the role
played by the Catholic Church in Curagaoan society. Armando Rudy Lampe’s dissertation
(1988) locates at the end of slavery, both slaves and the freed population of Curacao with-
in the contours of the power struggle between the Roman Catholic Church and the State.
This critical approach is also reflected in the book edited by B. Boudewijnse et al. (1992)
and coordinated by the priest and scholar J.M. Schoffeleers. This study examines the role
of the Catholic Church in the specific areas in which it has been influential in the lives of
the popular class.


                                                                                          15
Amado Romer (1984) assesses the contribution of the Church in the area of social well-
being and labour unions. Aart Broek (1990) focuses on themes such as the influence of the
Catholic Church on the popular class literature development in early twentieth-century
Curacao. No studies addressed, however, the syncretic character of the traditional religious
beliefs and practices of the slaves and manumitted former slaves.
    The new, sociological approach to history also led to a focus on the activities of women,
who for long had been of peripheral interest to historians. Towards the end of the twenti-
eth century this reassessment resulted in research on women’s contributions to the histo-
ry of Curagao. As a group, women had not been recognized sufficiently in historical writ-
ings. In this sense, these scholars joined the worldwide feministic approach to history
aimed at debunking preconceptions and paradigms based on gender prejudice.”
     On Curacao the pioneering study by the historian Nolda Romer-Kenepa (1980) was
one of the first to focus on Curacaoan women under slavery for analysis. She compared the
different ways in which they were socially placed in late nineteenth- and early twentieth-
century Curacao. In addition to slavery, gender to a large extent determined their lives.
This twofold hindrance was transferred to their freed descendants. Apart from gender dis-
crimination they were subjected to prejudices based on their colour and class. In this con-
text of growing awareness of women’s histories, the reader Mundu yama sinta mira (1992)
must also be mentioned here, as it contains abridged versions of studies on Curagaoan
women’s history.”
     In the search for a redefinition and reassessment of women’s role in society, the labour
history of women has received far more attention than any other subject in the new
women’s historiography. Annemiek van der Veen’s study (1984) on the making of straw
hats on Curacao and Bonaire rose from this interest. Through making straw hats, women
acquired an extra income for their families, thus enhancing their independence. In this
light van der Veen’s research also provides a valuable insight into women’s activities after
emancipation. However, much more research challenging the existing assumptions about
gender-relationships in society remains to be done, starting with the rewriting of the afore-
mentioned studies by male scholars, who have paid little attention to the gender issue.
More research is required on the role of the freed and enslaved women as labourers, moth-
ers and partners, and as carriers of ideas. Children, handicapped people and the elderly are
neglected groups also requiring further investigation.
     The reassessment of history by local scholars and amateurs intensified from the 1960s
onwards, and would give extra attention to Afro-Curagaoans in history. This process went
hand in hand with the issue of identity of the black popular class, which took place around
the same time as part of a larger international social movement in which people questioned
the existing political and social order. This renewed historical awareness manifested itself
on different levels. It made clear, for instance, the necessity of the establishment of a local
archive where relevant documents for the study of history can be preserved and consult-
ed. It also led to several movements aimed at commemorating significant historical dates.”
Principally, the slave revolt of 17 August 1795 received much attention. This revolt had
been spearheaded by among others the slaves Tula and Karpata, in a bid to highlight the
necessity of improving the social conditions of slaves. In an effort to reassess events and
groups excluded from history, this rebellion took the limelight and was considered a


16
pivotal point in slave history, not dealt with sufficiently or objectively in the existing his-
toriography.
     The rising interest for this aspect of history coincided with a call for the re-examina-
tion of existing publications regarding this particular event. Several books were published,
such as Hartog (1973) on Tula: a result of governmental attention to this subject. A year
later A.F, Paula (1974), the then director of the Central Historical Archive in Willemstad,
made public the official documents on this event.” The reassessment of one’s place in his-
tory led to another theme, which Paula (1967) had already addressed. In this work he
raised the issue of self-awareness and looked at the issue of identity and identity-forma-
tion within the Afro-Curacaoan group. He discussed the problem of how Afro-Curacaoans
tended to internalize the standards for self-judgement set by the white elite in society, and
their consequent self-denial (Paula 1967:31-2).
     The silence surrounding this part of history is a phenomenon still present. It was not
 until 1984 that the date of the 17 August 1795 slave revolt was institutionalized as a day of
 remembrance. And this only occurred after the Komishon di Koordinashon 17 di augustus
 had cited this as its main objective. This officialization required that institutions such as
 schools and the Ministry of Culture recognize this day. However, this has not led to any in-
 depth historical study being initiated by the government. When in the 1980s and 1990s soci-
 ety was challenged by economic problems, a soaring crime wave and a disenchanted youth,
 consecutive cabinets neglected the importance of history and concentrated instead on prac-
tical solutions for these problems. This corresponds with the prevailing general lack of
interest in history (Huender 1993). However, in non-governmental areas certain activities
did continue. The establishment in 1999 of the African museum “Kura Ulanda’ in Otroban-
da (Willemstad) has also led to a new phase in the stimulation of awareness in the subjects
of slavery and freedom. This museum introduces schoolchildren to African cultures and the
history of slavery. Annually a tour is organized by the Komishon Lucha di Libertat (Ruta
 Tula) in cooperation with the National Archives, visiting the principal locations where the
uprising of 1795 occurred.
     New research methods, moreover, have been explored in the process of a re-examina-
tion of history, presenting subjects previously neglected or unknown. An example of this
is the use of the archeological excavation, alongside the application of scientific techniques
such as carbon dating. In this way important information is gathered on artifacts, regard-
ing their age, origin, manufacture and function in society. At the moment archeological
studies are being performed in the Caribbean to reveal more about the slaves’ ways of life
and to link these to past cultures in Africa. On Curagao, the archeologist Jay Haviser has
dealt with this aspect in his study (1987) on the basis of archeological fieldwork.” In a later
study with co-author F.D. Antoin from Bonaire, they studied the ‘kas di palu di maishi’ of
Curacao and the ‘kas di bara’ of Bonaire by comparing their structures, materials, con-
struction forms and spatial use. They concluded that the differences have to do with the
nature of the European-African cultural contacts on each of the islands (Haviser and
Antoin 2003).
    The method of oral history has also been used to further study and document what
people were able to remember of slavery and the period afterwards. Examples are Marti-
nus (1996), Rutten (1989), Lampe (1988) and Rosalia (1997), who all utilized oral sources


                                                                                             17
in their studies. Frank Martinus used these sources and deciphered a long time extinct lan-
guage, Guene, in order to access its linguistic contribution to Papiamentu. A.M.G. Rutten
gave a cultural dimension to his study of medical history by using oral sources (1989) and
A. Lampe analysed the extent of protest and resistance by slaves to the system by means of
Ananzi stories (1988).
    While Lampe, Rutten and Martinus used oral sources collected by others, and thus
depended on how well these collectors had researched their data, René Rosalia’s disserta-
tion on the popular custom of the tambú was drawn from interviews he himself had con-
ducted with people knowledgeable on this subject. His pioneering book (1997) analyses
the persistence of the tambú, despite its persecution by the State and Church.” With this
publication Rosalia gives evidence that the black popular class possessed a deep power of
cultural resistance, and because of this, it also played an important role in the shaping of
Curacaoan culture. In 2004 Leon Weeber published the life history of Bubuchi Doran, who
recalled his life on the plantation Savaneta. The historiography regarding Afro-Curagaoans
is thus still burgeoning and there is need for more comprehensive studies on how they
lived. In addition, the post-emancipation period has also been relatively neglected in
Curacaoan historiography.
    Most scholars have either dealt with slavery or have leapt from slavery to the post-1917
industrial period. In this respect Curagaoan historiography shares a fate similar to the rest
of the Caribbean, where the focus has generally been on slavery rather than on the subse-
quent freedom. Karen Fog Olwig questions this imbalance by stating that ‘if we define
emancipation in the sense as free from constraint, control or the power of another it is not
easy to see how the abolition of slavery gave West Indians of African descent true emanci-
pation’ (1995c:3). Or, as Rebecca Scott argued in her study on post-emancipation:

     when one wants to formulate a research design for work on the aftermath of emanci-
     pation, the question arises: what exactly should one do with this insight about behav-
     tour, this realization that slave emancipation was neither a transcendent liberation nor
     a complete swindle, but rather an occasion for reshaping — within limits — social, eco-
     nomic and political relationships? (1988:408)

The findings of the few studies which have dealt with emancipation on Curacao under-
score the ambivalent situation as described in both statements. Several works show that the
major institutions in society did not change with the end of slavery. Ethnic relationships
based on colour and race remained an obstacle for social mobility, impeding the manu-
mitted from breaking through in the existing power structure, where plantation owners
and others struggled until the end of the nineteenth century to remain in control. Former
slaves and their children continued to live in poverty, constantly seeking employment
opportunities, either on existing plantations, in towns, or through emigration (Romer
1979; Renkema 1981a:179-84; Oostindie 1997).
    Life after emancipation cannot be merely examined on the basis of elite renderings of
this past. One should not underestimate the complexity of this past and the active role of
Afro-Curagaoans in the process. As W. Marshall states, if we are ‘to determine the mean-
ing of freedom in terms of social relations, consciousness and cultural activity, we should


18
not only look at the legislation, but also at choices people made which influenced their
actions and responses in their life’ (1993:12).
     Studying post-emancipation life of Afro-Curacaoans is justified as D. Eudell stated:
‘events during the post-slavery era, beginning with the way in which emancipation was
conceptualized and then later implemented, bear some direct relation, conceptual as well
as institutional, to the contemporary conditions with which the descendants of slaves
remain confronted’ (2002:7).
    At the moment of freedom a large part of society ceased to be the property of others.
Freedom, however, was not merely a change in legal status. It also delineated the founda-
tion for the existence of new community of people who within the constraints placed on
them by the ruling class had to define a new way of life for themselves as free citizens
(Brereton, 1999). It meant freedom of choice and greater possibilities to exercise their
capacities to deal with persisting social constraints. Their resilience and the various cre-
ative ways in which they skilfully dealt with the obstacles placed in their path, is at the heart
of this study.



A Turn towards Culture in Caribbean Historiography
As previously stated, in this thesis the key concept is culture. An important contribution
of anthropology to scholarly debates has been the fact that culture no longer is considered
something only pertaining to the elite group. After Edward B. Tylor (1871) in the nine-
teenth century defined culture in a broader anthropologist sense as the “complex whole
which includes knowledge, belief, arts, law, morals, customs and other capabilities and
 habits acquired by man as a member of society, there have been various other definitions
 and meanings. These include the various ways in which the cultures in the Caribbean have
been assessed.
     Over the years scholars have analysed Caribbean societies and cultures according to
several conceptual models. In the 1960s the plantation society model dominated in the
Anglophone Caribbean. According to this model, plantations are characterized by the pro-
duction of an agricultural monocrop for export, strong monopolistic tendencies and a
race-related class system with a weak community structure and a marginal peasantry —
these conditions further determined the culture, politics and economy of Caribbean soci-
eties. With their legacy of slavery, plantations would continue to influence social life and
culture in the Caribbean long after emancipation.
     This model has been criticized for its over-determinism of economy on other aspects
of society, while it neglects to establish relations between them. Furthermore it fails to take
into account that those low in the social hierarchy were also able to influence the system.
Hence it neglects perceptions of rights and duties, values, aspirations, ideas and beliefs of
various socio-economically disempowered yet important groups (Patterson 1967; Bolland
1997:7). It also overlooks the fact that these groups did not always readily accept cultural
dominion over their lives — those with power had to introduce laws and regulations to con-
trol the behaviour of the black lower classes in plantation societies both during and after
slavery (Bolland 1997:8). Finally this model fails to address the question of how those


                                                                                               WS)
                                                                                              it
without power modelled their life pattern within this structure of inequality. And as
solely focuses on plantations as an economic device, it is also difficult       to apply  it to
Curacaoan society, which has known a plantation system dissimilar to the rest of the
Caribbean.
    An alternative model elaborated by the Jamaican anthropologist M.G. Smith (1965)
recognizes the role of culture in its analysis. Smith followed the British economist J.S. Fur-
nivall (1948) who used the term ‘plural society’ to describe the culturally and institution-
ally complex features of South East Asian societies. Contrary to Furnivall, who utilized this
concept from a predominantly economic point of view in relation to the Dutch East
Indies, Smith focused on the concept of culture and defined the term ‘cultural plurality’:

     Cultural plurality [...] is a condition in which two or more different cultural traditions
     characterize the population of a given society [...]. Where cultural plurality obtains,
     different sections of the total population practice different forms of these common insti-
     tutions; and [...] differ in their social organization, their institutional activities, and
     their system of beliefs and values. Where this condition of cultural plurality is found,
     the societies are plural societies (1965:14).

According to Smith, in these plural societies there is often a lack of consensus of values
between ethnic groups, which manifests itself in institutions such as marriage, family, edu-
cation, economics, religion, language and folklore. Consequently these ethnic groups are
continuously in conflict, and are enforced politically through a cultural minority.
    The idea that in Caribbean society each social group formed a separate culture with-
out any cohesion with the rest was debunked with the concept of creolization. Developed
during the 1960s, creolization saw the shared legacy of European plantation societies with
enslaved Africans as the foundation of Caribbean culture. The mixture between European
and African cultures into a common creole culture resulted in a hybrid synthesis; one that
was neither European nor African. For Edward Brathwaite (1974), one of the main propo-
nents of this view on Caribbean culture, creolization as a cultural process took place
through two distinctive phases. The first was the process of acculturation, which reinforced
the superiority of the European culture with respect to the African and required the dom-
inated to submit by force. The process of interculturation follows as the subordinated
majority shape the dominant culture in ways that are unplanned, unstructured and
osmotic. The creolization process that results thus becomes the tentative cultural norm of
society.
    This creole society model in turn has been subject to scholarly critique. O. Nigel Bol-
land has been one of the main critics of the creole society model and denounces it as being
the action of ‘a desperate need for a coherent national ideology and cultural identity by
Caribbean nations in the sixties’ (1997:8). According to him this model is based on an
attempt to bring forward national integration and to create national unity between groups
of different ethnic origin in societies profoundly impacted by slavery and coloniatism and
now by other forces seemingly beyond their control. He further states that by presenting
the creole society in this way, one does not pay sufficient attention to change in society nor
to the role of structural contradictions and social conflicts happening within this process


20
of change. The more dialectic approach to the creole society model which he proposes
looks at the historical process of domination and subordination within society and at the
more mutually dependent relationship between social structure and human agency
(1997:8).
    Additionally, Michel-Rolph Trouillot argues that such models, including that of Bol-
land, also neglect historical particulars in the sense that they do not look at the concrete
circumstances of individuals engaged in the processes of social change. In Trouillot’s view,
they pay insufficient attention to the ability of people of African descent to create their cul-
tures ‘unexpectedly, unforeseen developments of an agenda set in Europe, by Europe and
for Europe’ (1998:10). In the same article, he further asserts that this model does not suf-
ficiently consider the ability of the African group in Caribbean societies to ‘stretch margins
and circumvent borderlines’ in spite of and within the context of cultural domination
(1998:27-8).
    A key issue in these discussions becomes then the question of which role Afro-
Caribbeans played in the production and reproduction of culture in Caribbean societies,
consisting of groups whose social and political position has been determined by colour
and ethnicity. Many theories have affirmed that those in power control the dominant value
system through the institutions of State and society. The following questions then arise:
How do those in subordinated positions accept or contest these values and ideas of dom-
ination? And how do they transform them into something new and different?
    The analysis of cultural creativity of those of African descent in Caribbean societies
both during and after slavery has been an ongoing debate for many decades. The debate
began with E. Franklin Frazier, who argued in an early study (1939) that due to Middle
Passage’s experiences, upon their arrival in the Caribbean, Africans experienced a cultural
vacuum and consequently lost their culture.” Melville and Frances Herskovits (1934),
Melville Herskovits (1941),” John Blassingame (1972), Lawrence Levine (1977) and Her-
bert Gutman (1976) have questioned this view, and broke new grounds by showing that
even though slaves lived under severe conditions, they were able to survive as a communi-
ty and recreate their own cultures based on elements that originated from African cultures.
    In the search for African cultural elements, other studies have attempted to prove that
certain African cultural forms had continued to exist in the Caribbean. Melville and
Frances Herskovits (1934, 1941) conducted extensive research in Africa and the Caribbean
and identified ‘retention’ or survivals, as they called some components in Caribbean cul-
ture which they linked to African culture. The Herskovits’ theory of retention has been
questioned by Sidney Mintz and Richard Price (1976), who found this vision of culture too
static. According to them the Afro-American culture emanated to a large part in the
Caribbean itself (1976:10). It is difficult to find surviving African elements in the Ameri-
cas since from the start slaves were systematically prevented from bringing with them those
materials which maintained their homeland institutions, the complex social structures of
their ancestral societies. Mintz and Price further argued that West African knowledge has
been perpetuated in the unconscious, underlying ‘grammatical principles. These are the
cognitive orientations, attitudes and expectations common to the diverse communities
from which most of the enslaved originated and which are shared by all African slaves
despite varied African origins (1976:4-5).


                                                                                              21
Others scholars have taken the discussion a step further and have looked at the variety of
ways in which enslaved people affected cultural processes, through resisting the established
order, The historian Eugene Genovese distinguished two types of resistance during slavery
and consequently argued that slaves in the United States resisted covertly rather than
overtly. He claimed that slave revolts occurred where the relationship between master and
slave was more business-like and hard, as was the case in very large slave holding units
(Genovese 1974:591). Covert resistance tended to occur in opposite situations. Genovese,
however, also viewed accommodation as a type of resistance. ‘Accommodation itself’, as he
pointed out, ‘breathed a critical spirit and disguised subversive actions and often embraced
its apparent opposite, resistance’ (1974:591). By being accommodating to slavery, the slaves
appeared to agree to the situation, thus avoiding falling victim to the forces of dehuman-
ization, deprivation and self-hatred.
     ‘Resistance’ has become an all-encompassing term in studying the everyday manifesta-
tion of social life in the Caribbean. The anthropologist Peter J. Wilson, who published one
of the earliest works on historical anthropology, applied a bipolar model to the theory of
resistance in his study of everyday social life of English-speaking people on the Colom-
bian-owned islands of Providence (1973). In this model, he placed the value of respectabi-
lity at one end and reputation at the other end. Respectability has to do with the moral
force behind the coercive power of colonialism and neo-colonialism and is dominated by
the value system of the churches. It is generally supported by the middle class and all class-
es of women, who seemingly are more influenced by the Church than men. Key values rep-
resented here are marriage, the home, self-restraint, work, education, economy, purpose-
ful self-construction and respect for social hierarchical values. Reputation refers to
resistance and centres on those behaviour patterns that oppose respectability (Wilson
1973:102, 233). A major criticism of Wilson’s bipolar model comes from the feministic
studies which go against the view that Caribbean women were compliant to this domina-
tion (Besson 2001:93).
    Resistance manifests itself in different forms. Several authors cite the everyday life of
subjugated people as a form of resistance to those with power. The anthropologist James
C. Scott, for example, studied (1990) the ways in which subordinated people respond in
their daily activities to the dominant groups and how they continually resist them, both
collectively and individually. According to Scott, in contrast to those with power — who
display their domination openly and publicly — those subjugated often wear a ‘mask, which
manifests itself in stupid, innocent or servile behaviour to hide and retain what little power
they have. The anthropologist Lawrence Levine has labelled this attitude ‘masking: It is
expressed both in speech and in behaviour and involves a whole range of activities (1977:8-
9). Scott calls them the ‘hidden transcripts, as they entail the offstage speeches, gestures
and practices that confirm, contradict or inflect what appears in the public sphere and
takes place beyond the direct observation of those with power (1990:4-5). In the case of
Curacao, Armando Lampe (1988) and René Rosalia (1997) have researched aspects of life
in the past within this context of resistance, contradicting the idea that Afro-Curacaoans
accepted the existing power relationship passively.
    However, an analysis of the everyday life of subjugated people almost solely in the con-
text of either resistance or compliance obscures matters. Do they in their daily lives solely


DD)
and continually respond or react to these oppressing forces? Do they manifest dissident
cultural behaviour patterns solely to oppose the powerful? Mintz is among those who have
argued against characterizing certain actions of people either as resistance or as compli-
ance. Either type of action does not necessarily exclude the other. The most effective forms
of resistance, as Mintz points out, were built on prior forms of adaptation to oppressive
living conditions (1974:75-81).
     De Certeau distinguishes between what he calls strategies of resistance and strategies of
opposition. According to him, resistance is only possible when those dominated (as a
group or as individuals) act outside the system of domination enclosing them. The oppo-
sition strategies, in contrast, are the internal manipulations of the established order that
may disrupt, but do not threaten or transform the power system. The concept of tactical
opposition often entails people achieving their goals through negotiating, collaborating
and compromising with those in power and within the system that controls them (de
Certeau 1984:35).
     Richard Burton extends this idea to the Caribbean (1997). He applies the concept of
play, elaborated by Scott (1990), to his analysis of how Afro-Caribbean people oppose
power in their daily lives. He argues that it is in the arena of play and not in that of work
— where control was very evident — that Afro-Caribbean people manifested their autono-
my and opposed the controlling forces. This arena of play manifested itself in cultural
areas such as music, dance, food, religion and parties. He suggests, however, that this cul-
tural opposition is double-edged. According to Burton, Afro-Caribbean culture by its very
creoleness cannot step entirely outside the dominant system in order to resist it, and in that
way it involuntarily tends to reproduce its underlying structures (1997:8).
     Olwig has observed this in her study of Afro-Nevisian culture (1993). After freedom,
she concludes, Caribbean societies became even more complex, as people interrelated and
interacted on a greater scale than before, while looking for social and economic opportu-
nities inside and outside their own society. Olwig approached the cultural implications of
interrelatedness and interactions according to modern concepts such as ‘global flows’, ‘cul-
tural complexity and ‘fluidity. She based her approach on that of Arjun Appadurai (1990)
and Ulf Hannerz (1992), who have looked at present cultures as the results of global
processes characterized by the fast streams of information, images and knowledge, and by
people who are constantly on the move. Key in this is how people reinterpret and localize
these global processes and their impact on society.
    Culture has thus been redefined within the context of movement, positioning and
interpretation. It no longer seems pervasive, logical and connected, but rather diverse,
inconsistent and contentious (Barth 1989:124). Culture is ordered as it operates within
‘streams of cultural traditions, which are certain cultural elements able to persist, mani-
festing themselves with some coherence over time (Barth 1989:130; Olwig 1995c:103).
Olwig analyses this Afro-Caribbean culture from the viewpoint of what she labelled three
‘cultural traditions’. The first refers to those connected with the development of a colonial
society based on a plantation economy with a strong patriarchal characteristic, where
those in the lower social hierarchy were allowed some space to express their culture with-
in the oppression situation. The social institutions they developed were determined by the
space allowed by the masters to maintain themselves, but also by the ‘grammatical


                                                                                           23
principles’ (Mintz and Price 1976:7, 9). For example, slaves were allowed festivities such as
Christmas, Easter and harvest. They could celebrate certain events as long as they acted
and behaved according to the accepted ideals of those in power.
    The second tradition deals with the way in which the Afro-Nevisian group continued
to organize itself internally, based on what Mintz and Price have called ‘grammatical prin-
ciples’ (1976:7, 9). The enslaved created a cultural sphere of their own, with their own
value systems, outside the sphere of control imposed by their master. These involved their
notion of kinship, both fictive and bilateral, as well as their way of belonging to different
socio-cultural groupings. These communities developed both within and outside the con-
fines of the plantations.
    The third tradition came with the influence of the British missionaries and concerned
their idea of respectability, stressing values such as ‘decency, morality and a proper sexual
attitude’. Afro-Nevisians adopt in their own culture elements from the culture deemed
respectable by those with power. In their everyday lives, this is applied where it is conven-
ient to their own knowledge, practices, values, initiatives and aspirations (Olwig 1995a:23-
39;1995c:113). It is precisely through displaying this paradoxical behaviour that they expe-
rience the concept of freedom withheld from them by the dominant class.
    What is also important in the thought of Olwig is that she includes next to slavery, the
impact of freedom on Afro-Caribbean culture. Most of the old theoretical models and
their applications may suggest that only slavery and the circumstances surrounding it have
been decisive in the formation of cultures in the Caribbean. In Olwig’s vision, however,
emancipation added to the complexity and fluidity of Afro-Caribbean cultures.



A Turn towards Culture in the Historiography of Curacao
The study of Dutch Caribbean culture was pioneered by the historian R.A.J. van Lier and
the sociologists Hoetink and René Römer. Van Lier ushered in the discussion on race, class
and ethnicity in the Caribbean and introduced the model of plural culture in the region
(Sankatsing 2001:60). According to van Lier (1953-1954), Surinamese society was seg-
mented and composed of several cultural groups of different race, ethnicity, language, reli-
gion and economic spheres, who coexisted but rarely mingled.
    Hoetink continued to use van Lier’s concept of a segmented society and applied it to
Curacao (1962:2). This was a segmented society in the sense that it consisted of several
groups of different races and associated cultures, each with its own social institutions,
structure and social rank, while society as a whole was politically governed by one of
these groups. In his earlier analysis of social hierarchy within Curacaoan slave society, the
Dutch and other Europeans were at the apex, themselves divided into Higher and Lower
Protestant classes. Next in line were the Sephardic Jews, who arrived in the seventeenth
century and who dedicated themselves mostly to commerce. At the bottom were the
majority of African descent, who had arrived as slaves (Hoetink 1958). In a later edition
of his 1958 dissertation, Hoetink argued that the system of pure plurality is only present
at the beginning, when within a society groups of different cultures and racial back-
grounds are placed together in a rigid hierarchical order. The cultural interchange


 24
between these groups begins immediately afterwards, through social and sexual contacts
 (Hoetink 1987:xii).
     The Curagaoan sociologist René Römer was among the first Antillean scholars to write
on the issue of culture and cultural identity on Curacao. In agreement with Hoetink,
Romer considered the system of segmentation to be present only at the beginning of a
process, when groups of different cultures and racial backgrounds are initially placed
together in a rigid hierarchical order within an emerging society. This initial process then
gives way to the second phase, when social contacts lead to some racial mixing and cultural
transfers between ethnicities.* According to Hoetink and Romer, this fusion between dif-
ferent cultures in society, which Hoetink initially referred to as acculturation, and later cre-
olization, is trilateral in Curacao. It had emerged from the admixture of white Protestant
West European culture, the Latin (or Iberian) culture of Sephardic Jews and African cul-
tures, which over time developed its own authentic character.” This creolization process
manifested itself in cultural areas such as music and dance, eating habits and architecture,
but principally through the use of Papiamentu.”
    Both Hoetink and Romer do not view cultural contact as has occurred on Curacao as
an unilinear process, in which cultural values were transmitted solely from the dominant
to the subjugated, leading to change in their behaviour and cultural patterns. However,
Afro-Curacaoans are only awarded a limited role in this process. Römer explains this by
stating that the Curagaoan creole culture vacillates between the ‘undesired Africanization
of the culture of the white population and the Europeanization of the black population
(1995520).
    Despite their attention to this dynamic interaction, the way in which Hoetink and
Römer apply the idea of creolization does not capture sufficiently the tensions and con-
tradictions arising from this fusion of culture in society. Some expressions supported by
people of African descent were considered as folk culture, elements of African survivals or
echo’s from Africa. These expressions were named in that way, without an in-depth study
of their impact on society. They are also separated from the creole culture and are mar-
ginalized as expressions only existent among the social group without economic power.
Römer acknowledged this omission in a later publication, in which he addressed the ques-
tion as to whether the African elements in Curagaoan culture are a “peripheral phenome-
non only existent among the black population in society, or whether they are part of the
creole culture belonging to all ethnic groups of society’ (Römer 1998:82).
    The studies of Lampe (1988) and Rosalia (1997), who researched aspects of life in the
past using the resistance model, went against the idea that Afro-Curagaoans accepted the
existing power relationship in a passive form, rather than resisting in numerous ways. Both
Lampe and Rosalia looked at the arena of play to sustain their thesis empirically. Lampe
examined Nanzi stories, while Rosalia looked at it from the perspective of the tambu.
    The focus solely on the resistance of subjugated people and their effort to counter-
hegemonize those in control oversimplifies the fact that subjugated people live their day-
to-day lives in a myriad of ways. They do not solely and continuously respond or react to
these oppressive forces. They do not only manifest sanctioned or dissident cultural behav-
iour patterns to oppose the powerful. In other words, everyday life is much more complex
than merely resisting or accommodating those with power. In addition to conflict and


                                                                                             25
confrontation, the daily social life of subjugated people contains elements of solidarity,
cooperation and reciprocity that shape a great deal of the cultural processes. Furthermore,
resistance theories, while placing exaggerated focus on conflicts and external dynamics,
overlook the internal cultural dynamics that help to shape the form and texture of every-
day life as well as many of its social institutions.
    In one of the latest attempts to look at the life of Afro-Curagaoans in the post-eman-
cipation period, Haviser (2001) focuses on the value systems which have governed the atti-
tude of Afro-Curacaoans both before and after emancipation. He concludes that after 1863
Afro-Curacaoans changed from being submissive and cooperative to being competitive
and alienated. Haviser principally looks at the role the Roman Catholic Church played in
education.
    The model of cultural complexity applied by Olwig to the small Leeward island of
Nevis also holds true for Curacao. Within this model, culture is complex, multidimen-
sional in scope, fluid and limited by traditions. Conflict, confrontation and contest are
constant elements, as are cooperation, teciprocity and negotiation. Olwig, however, stud-
ied this model for a society characterized by a plantation economy. On the contrary,
Curagaoan society was unfamiliar with the large-scale plantation economy common to the
rest of the Caribbean. Here other factors influenced the complexity of Afro-Curagaoan
society even further.
    The first factor was Curacao’s unique position in the Caribbean as a transit and hold-
ing place for enslaved Africans to be sold on to mainland Spanish colonies. This had con-
sequences for the cultural traditions and thus added to the complex character of society.
The second factor influencing social life was that colonial society was economically found-
ed on commerce and strategic goods rather than on a plantation economy common to the
rest of the Caribbean. The enslaved tended to be involved in the production of subsistence
products for the plantation owners. This significantly differentiated them from the
enslaved on other Caribbean islands, contributing to the formation of a type of social sys-
tem and culture different from that commonly found in the Caribbean, both during sla-
very and after. The third element to consider is the position of the Roman Catholic
Church, which after the nineteenth century began to play a crucial role in the lives of Afro-
Curagaoans. The Church attempted to bring them in line with a ‘civilized’ culture.



Conclusion and Central Questions
Recent historical publications on Curagao have used a socio-historical perspective to study
the historically marginalized role of Afro-Curacaoans. Even though literature in this area
is not yet as extensive as it is in the rest of the Caribbean, this new perspective has chal-
lenged historians and social scientists to explore new sources and new historical research
methods, such as archaeology and oral history.
    Most of these studies have addressed the slavery period and/or twentieth-century post-
industrial society. As previously stated, the immediate post-emancipation period has not
received sufficient attention. The few studies on this subject reveal that after 1863 the social
institutions of power persisted and that colour and race remained central to social


26
 mobility. Post-emancipation social life has demonstrated how socially marginalized peo-
 ple continued to be subjugated. In these studies, power and resistance are central concepts.
While this is an important advance, most studies on the post-emancipation period have
 neglected the complexity of the Afro-Curacaoan experience and the dynamics of social
 interaction within and beyond the group.
     In this thesis my concern is to reveal the cultural complexities of Curacaoan society and
 more specifically the role played in this by the Afro-Curacaoan majority. I will explore the
varied forms in which the social and cultural lives of Afro-Curagaoans developed during
the post-slavery era until 1917 by considering the complex ways in which they interacted
 among themselves and with other groups in society. This complexity is determined by
 many factors, for example by the diversity of the group itself. In addition their social life is
 influenced by cultural processes originating from the existing power structures within the
group and with the former slave-owners, the State and the Roman Catholic Church.
     The central questions in this thesis are: What role did the State, the former slave-owners
and the Roman Catholic Church play in the lives of Afro-Curacaoans in the post-emancipa-
 tion era, in what ways did Afro-Curacaoans shape their own material, social and spiritual
lives, either within, outside or in opposition to the constraints of these institutions?
     More specifically, I will try to answer the following questions:
* Taking into account the continuing restrictions (juridical, economical and social) fol-
     lowing emancipation, what survival strategies were available to Afro-Curagaoans and
     how did these determine the decisions they made in their everyday lives? How did these
     strategies relate to other large societal issues, such as migration and the management
     of land resources?
- How has the social order been maintained and contested? Which role did the Church
     and State play in this and how did the populace respond?
+ What was the outlook on life of the former enslaved and how was life symbolized and
     ritualized in their daily lives?

In order to answer these questions, it will be necessary to tap resources other than the writ-
ten ones dominant in traditional historiography. I will argue the necessity of this in the
next Chapter.



Notes

1   Lewis (1998) denies this accusation and claims that particularly in the United States anthropolo-
    gy has not shown a lack of historical concern. According to him, even British anthropology has
    only been a-historical for a very brief period; a trend which was not followed by all its practi-
    tioners (see for example Edward Evans-Pritchard 1961). Societies and cultures are being recog-
    nized as dynamic entities, therefore the study of their history is essential for a full understanding.
2   The terms ‘free coloured’, ‘free people of colour’ and ‘freedmen’ refer to manumitted persons, in
    most cases of mixed racial ancestry. Gradually they came to be defined as a separate socio-racial
    group.
3   In 1863 the group of Afro-Curagaoans comprised approximately 85 per cent of the total island
    population, of which 35 per cent had been freed on 1 July 1863, the date of emancipation in the
    Dutch colonies (Oostindie 1995b :158; 1997:56).


                                                                                                       OT
                                                                                                 lack of
     Oostindie (1987) attributed this initial amateurism in historical literature to the general
     attention in the colonizing motherland for the history of these areas.
     See also Klooster 1985.
     The priest-historian M.D. Latour (1950:27) considered Hamelberg, who was also a civil servant,
     to be the first historian of Curacao. He granted Hamelberg this status due to the fact that in his
     writings he had made use of official documents and governmental archives. At Hamelberg’s
     death the local newspaper La Cruz (15-1-1919) wrote that Curacao had lost a great friend. He
     was also praised for his efforts to bring economic projects to Curagao and St. Eustatius.
     In 1896 the civil servant Hamelberg proposed the establishment of a Society for the study of his-
     tory. The then governor C. Barge recommended an expansion of this Society, enabling it to also
     focus on language, geographical origin and what was then called ‘volkenkunde’ In the Nether-
     lands the term ‘volkenkunde’ was utilized until the twentieth century as a synonym for ‘ethnol-
     ogy’ and ‘ethnography’. The Society's official name was: ‘Genootschap voor Geschied-, Taal-,
     Land- en Volkenkunde’.
     As a result of this approach Curagao, as the centre of Dutch colonization in the Caribbean,
     received far more attention than the other five islands of the Netherlands Antilles, which at the
     time were called “Curacao en Onderhorigheden’ (the present name was not officially introduced
     until 1948). It was more or less taken for granted that by writing the history of Curagao, the his-
     tory of Aruba, Bonaire, St. Martin, Saba and St. Eustatius would also be covered.
     Goslinga (1971) represents this traditional focus on politics in historiography. Goslinga was an
     (art) historian and a novelist, who would later become a professor at the University of Califor-
     nia and at the University of Florida (Gainesville). As the title of this book indicates, the author
   looked at the imperial history of the Dutch in the Caribbean and in Africa and at their quest for
   land in these areas. Hamelberg was early in his advocation for writing the history of the Dutch
   Leeward Islands and that of the Windward Islands as separate units. Initially, however, his pro-
   posals to the colonial government fell on deaf ears. When, for example, he wanted to write a his-
   tory of St. Eustatius and therefore deemed it necessary to visit St. Martin and Saba as well, his
   request to the government in 1892 for financial support was denied (NA, Ministerie van
   Koloniën, 12-9-1892/551, inv. no. 6789). In 1903 Hamelberg produced a compilation of original
   documents on the two island units (Hamelberg 1901-1903b), thus making public some govern-
   ment records available on these islands.
   Both Hoyer and van Meeteren were addressed as ‘Shon’, indicating their high social position
   (Shon Wein Hoyer and Shon Popie).
10 See Hoyer 1933, 1937, 1941. See De Gaay Fortman (1934) for a review of Algun pagina tuma foi
   historia di Curacao by Hoyer.
11 Van Meeteren wrote several books on Curagaoan history (for example 1950 and 1951). Soon after
     he died, van Meeteren was recognized as one of the three most important historians of his time,
   together with W.R. Menkman and B. de Gaay Fortman. See the article by M.D. Latour in Amigoe,
   11-5-1953. See also the article by B. de Gaay Fortman in Beurs en Nieuwsberichten, 13-4-1953.
   See several publications by Brada. For an overview of Euwens’ work, see Nagelkerke 1973 and
   1982. The priest Latour ventured to write on secular matters. He wrote a number of articles on
   themes such as the Papiamentu language and the belief-system on Curacao, which he called
   Voodoo, after the Afro-Caribbean religion of Haiti.
   Already in 1891 a person named W. Henriquez requested a monument to be erected to the mem-
   ory of Niewindt. See La Union, 27-5-1891.
14 Amigoe di Curacao, 4-10-1924.
15 See also Blussé, van der Putten and Vogel (1996:311). In this interview Hoetink claims to have
   been inspired by the Brazilian sociologist Gilberto Freyre, who used social science methods
     (1946). Van Lier’s sociological-historical book on Suriname (1949) had also been a source of
     inspiration in reaching a non-traditional historiography for the island, which he refers to in the
     following comment: ‘Although some history books had been written, no effort had been made



28
     to analyse, be it in a modest way, Curagao’s society in the way that van Lier had done for Suri-
     name.
     In 1967 a shorter English version of this work was published.
     See also van Soest 1980 and 1983.
     See also Beckles and Shepherd 1991:209-21.
     See also Renkema 1975. Rupert (1999) focuses on five hundred years of commercial history on
     the island. Jews were predominant in this history. However, Rupert also examines the contribu-
     tions of some members of the popular class to the commercial activities on the island in the form
     of small-scale trading.
  oO Brereton 1988. See also Shepherd, Brereton and Bailey 1995.

bh
bo   See also Philipps 1988; Henriquez 1991; Cuales 1980.
     On 1 July 1863 slaves received their freedom in the Netherlands Antilles. On 26 July 1499 the
     Spaniards had arrived on the islands. Initially the commemoration of the 17 August 1795 slave
     revolt was an activity of individuals who were challenging the existing order. For several years,
     these groups — through movements and foundations — made it their principal goal to create an
     awareness of the slave revolt and its leaders. Examples are the ‘Movementu 17-8-1795’ established
     in 1968, and the ‘Fundashon Identidat Antiano’ (the Foundation for Antillean identity) led by A.F.
     Paula. The aim of the first group was to improve the self-esteem of the black Curacaoan. A step in
     the right direction was to commemorate the slave revolt. In this, they differed from the second
     group, which strived for the recognition of the first of July as a national day.
25   See also Do Rego 1995. Do Rego’s use of Papiamentu to explain the causes and developments of
     this slave revolt was seen as an attempt to make history accessible to the general Antillean pub-
     lic.
24   See also Haviser 1991 and 1999. Some years previously, Haviser used a similar method for uncov-
     ering the indigenous Amerindian culture on the island. His work gave another dimension to
     local historiography since history had focused almost exclusively on European contact.
25   During slavery the tambú was feared by slave-owners, as it offered the enslaved the opportunity
     to gather and express their disgust about their situation by means of song and dance. It was also
     condemned by the Catholic clergy, who called the dance lascivious and sexually immoral. Mem-
     bers of the older generation still relate the severe forms of punishment of those found partici-
     pating in a tambú celebration. Punishment by the clergy included the confiscation of drums,
     whipping, and even expulsion from the Catholic Church.
26   Frazier based his ideas on the situation in the United States and stated that due to slavery blacks
     had become uprooted people. The phenomenon of matrifocality among the descendants of the
     enslaved was taken as an example of one of the results of this cultural uprootedness.
27   In 1934 Melville and Frances Herskovits published a study on religious survivals among the
     Saramaca.
28   Romer also used the term ‘segmented society’ (1964, 1969).
29 Römer (1964:20). See also Römer 1969 and 1993.
30 Römer maintained that Curacao’s distinctive culture manifested itself predominantly in the
   Papiamentu language (see Römer 1974 and 1993). The status of this creole language differs from
     local languages on other Caribbean islands since it is recognized and used as a means of com-
     munication by all social classes (Römer 1993).




                                                                                                     29
CHAPTER II
A Methodology of Afro-Curacaoan
History: Archival and Oral Sources



Introduction

The British historian Edward Thompson emphasizes in his seminal work on the origins of
the English working class (1977) that historiography should aim at remembering ‘the poor
stocker, the Luddite cropper, the “obsolete” hand-loom weaver, the “utopian” artisan and
even the deluded follower of Joanna Southcott’ (1977:13). Historiography, he later wrote,
must not only examine what has happened, but should also analyse the different ways in
which the masses have acted and thought in certain situations. Essentially, it should look
at how they conducted their everyday lives and how they strove to make something of their
situation (1991:5).
     Increasingly this approach has found acceptance among historians. There has been a
change in the approach of studying the past, by examining large groups of people previ-
ously neglected in historiography. Historians are now aware that they cannot interpret his-
tory as a sequence of events in which only men with power played important roles. There
is a growing recognition of human activity at every level, not simply a myopic focus on
politics. This manifests itself in the study of societies from a micro-perspective, focusing
on, for example, small communities, individuals, and life within the family or other
domestic groups. This new approach also concerns itself with meanings and perceptions
of people throughout history and therefore looks at how ordinary people viewed their life
and gave meaning to it (Frykman 1996:25).'
    Determining meanings for those neglected by history has proven no easy task. How do
we research the lives of the masses? More precisely, how do we proceed to gather data on
these groups rarely documented by the authorities? What types of data are then available?
Where can we find them and what are their strengths and weaknesses?
   In the Caribbean, scholars such as Melville J. Herskovits (1941), and later Sidney Mintz
and Richard Price (1976), as well as Michel-Rolph Trouillot (1995), have been strong advo-
cates of this broader approach to history. Publications on this subject have been numer-
ous. At a time when little attention was paid to the lives of the black population in the
Americas, Herskovits constantly argued against the idea that blacks had no history. To
prove this, he collected both in Africa and in the Americas as many detailed data regard-
ing their cultural history as possible.
Mintz and Price, even though opposed to Herskovits’ theory of African retention and sur-
vival in the Americas — preferring instead the term ‘transformations’ — also applied ethno-
graphical methodologies and anthropological theories to their studies of the populations


                                                                                          al
                                                                                             the
in the Caribbean of African descent. Price (1983), for instance, is an attempt to study
history of the Surinamese Saramacan Maroons based on        their own   forms   of transmitti ng
history. He paired their recollection of history with the written  accounts   laid down   by the
Dutch colonial power.
    On Curacao one can consider the aforementioned study by Rosalia on the tambu
(1997) as an important step towards this new approach. Rosalia based his work to a large
extent on oral testimonies and songs which he had collected over many years while living
among the black popular class. These oral testimonies were presented alongside written
documents. This musical expression, seen as immoral by the authorities and thus sup-
pressed, was re-examined as a valid experience of Afro-Curagaoans. Thus, the author has
given a new dimension to historiography.
     Since the use of oral sources is central to my study I would like to move away from the
debate about their value and importance for historical writing. In this Chapter I will focus
on how I use oral sources as material for historical reading, specifically for the purpose of
examining the cultural complexity of post-emancipation Afro-Curagaoan social life. First-
ly, I will describe how I plan to use narrative analysis to understand the oral testimonies I
have collected. Secondly, I will discuss how I have tried to overcome the problems of verac-
ity and representativeness which challenge their use.



Oral Sources as a Basis for Study
In order to analyse the values and ideas of those whom history has rendered silent, one
should search for what James Scott has called the ‘hidden transcripts. Scott explains that
these consist of those offstage speeches, gestures and practices that confirm, contradict or
inflect what appears in the public transcript (1990:4-5). They encompass the various ways
in which people behave and think when they are out of reach of those in authority. They
include the ‘offstage’ behaviour and intentions adopted to help them gain some kind of
power. Sometimes these hidden transcripts are even conspiratorial in nature as they are
also a way in which the subjugated group openly expresses its discontent with the behav-
iour of the dominant class.
     Oral sources are central to discovering these hidden transcripts (Smith 2001:7-11).
Besides providing information on important historical events that have guided the lives of
people and on how these people understand and explain their past, they also give an
insight into the ideas and values behind their actions — both when the dominant institu-
tions allow them space to express their culture and when they are in the privacy of their
own group. In that way, they present the symbolic frameworks within which ordinary peo-
ple defined their lives and the value they attributed to these symbols. According to Alessan-
dro Portelli, ‘they provide a window for the understanding and interpretation of the lives
of people, who previously were not considered an important element in the historiogra-
phy (1994:351).
    A large part of the oral sources in this study is based on my research carried out dur-
ing the period between 1980 and 1995, when I was working at the Institute of Archeolog
                                                                                          y
and Anthropology of the Netherlands Antilles (AAINA). The oral research project
                                                                                      by the


5
AAINA is a government supported attempt to document as much information as possible
about the life and customs on Curagao in the past by interviewing people over sixty years
of age. The respondents had been born between 1883 and 1926 and came from all parts of
the island. They ranged from those with no formal education to those who studied as far
as secondary school. Generally women were less educated than men, with some receiving
no schooling at all and others attending convent schools where they had learned how to
sew and make straw hats.
     In my research I have sought to make a distinction between oral history and oral tradi-
tion. Both consist of oral material, in the sense that they are transmitted orally and, in this
case, conducted in the context of fieldwork. Oral history entails testimonies and personal
recollections of people who have experienced certain events first-hand or who were suffi-
ciently close to the events to recollect them. Oral tradition embodies stories, myths, songs,
proverbs and other information passed down by word of mouth from generation to gener-
ation.
     In theory this distinction can be made. However, in a field situation the line is harder
to draw and is continually being crossed by ‘the bearers of testimonies’ (Dorson 1979:9).
According to Richard Dorson one should not overlook the fact that, firstly, over time oral
history will incorporate folk elements, and secondly, that folklore material such as stories,
proverbs, myths and songs can also shed light on the historical past (1979:45).
     During the project the interviewees were informed about the objectives of the research.
Following this they were questioned on what they could remember of their parents’ and
grandparents lives, in particular relating to work, social and spiritual life. In this way their
lives were given some family context. They were also asked whether their ancestors had
passed down any information regarding slavery and, if so, what the nature of this infor-
mation was. The interviewees were then asked further questions on their own life and,
depending on what they remembered, were asked to give more detail on specific issues,
events or customs. I taped most of the interviews with the permission of the informants.
In doing so, they have become primary sources verifiable by others. After the demise of the
AAINA these recordings are now stored in the National Archives in Willemstad.



On Methodological and Practical Aspects
The oral source is distinct from other branches of primary historical material due to its
reliance on memory rather than on texts. The fact that these testimonies are not
contemporary with the related events and issues, and that their recordings are mostly car-
ried out long after the events, has resulted in them being judged a-scientific, selective and
fragmented, as well as subjected to biases and quirks. These observations compound the
perception that texts are the only reliable historical sources. In this sense the reliability of
verbalizations is judged according to the same criteria as written texts, resulting in little
attempt being made to reveal particularities retained within memory (Ong 2002:10-1).
    The awareness that oral sources are generally perceived in this way placed before me
certain challenges when collecting and processing the information. It was thus important
to find out how Afro-Curacaoans have continued to remember events and issues often


                                                                                              515)
occurring in their early lives or in those of their ancestors, and how they have been able to
transmit this information to younger generations. Furthermore, as my study also deals
with everyday life experiences following emancipation, the question is how do we retrieve
information on a subject such as daily routines — the majority of which are unmemorable
and thus easily forgotten? The issue of memory was paramount in my study.
    Finally, not all people were willing to transmit information to a person outside their
friends and family. Oral history differs from the more traditional forms of story-telling
both in its narrative range and in the type and degree of audience involvement. There is a
face to face exchange between interviewee and interviewer, mediated by the strategic place-
ment of a microphone. The interviewer is not part of the interviewee’s social circle. The
interviewee creates the situation but this is shaped by the interviewer asking questions
which are more directive than the audience reaction during story-telling (Portelli
1994:164).
     Considering this method’s directive approach, how do we get people to transmit infor-
mation which perhaps they would rather erase from their memory as they consider it of
little value for their self-identity? The question is then not what do people remember, but
what do they want to remember, and how, if at all, do they transmit information consi-
dered unworthy of remembering? For example, when people were unwilling to talk, they
would say things such as: ‘I do not remember anything’ or: ‘why are you interested in this
stupidity?’ Particularly regarding themes such as slavery, and the relationship between
themselves or their forefathers and plantation owners, was there often hesitation before
they were willing to talk. Some stated bluntly that it was never discussed within the fami-
ly or that they would rather not discuss it. Some would even express anger at the fact that
I was trying to retrieve information they were trying hard to forget.
     Paul Brenneker and Elis Juliana, who were the first to conduct serious ethnographic
research on the island, also signalled this phenomenon. In an interview I had with Bren-
neker in 1991 in anticipation of the fact that he and Juliana would be honoured during the
folklore festival held in Curagao that year, he related the following:

     In those days, it was very difficult to interview people. People did not like to be ques-
     tioned, and were reluctant to give information. They carried a lot of hatred in them.
     About the mistreatment of the enslaved they did not know all the details, but they were
     still very angry. They would get angry again when one would say that their ancestors
     had been slaves.

Thus one of the challenges during my research was to overcome the older generation’s
unwillingness to talk about certain areas of their past they would rather not be reminded
of or, as was often the case, would like to erase completely from memory. The approach of
Brenneker and Juliana to this phenomenon proved very effective: both claimed that it was
worthwhile to initially build up a sense of trust with the interviewees.
    For me this involved visiting the informants on more than one occasion and paying
attention to their emotional and social needs; generally helping out wherever possible. It
also meant participating in important events in their lives, such as the birth of a grand-
child, the death of family members, first communion and marriage ceremonies etc.
                                                                                    This is


34
 in fact the ethnographic research method to uncover the past. As a relationship of trust was
 built, the respondents were more inclined to relate all types of information. Furthermore,
 I observed that certain sensitive, but valuable, information would be given more easily
 when no tape recorder was present. People would then be more open about painful
 episodes experienced by their family or by themselves.
      During the interviews it was essential to get people to recall as many memories as pos-
 sible. When a person seemed to forget certain valuable pieces of information, I developed
 devices to help trigger the memory, thus facilitating the continuation of the story. One
 such way was to allow a member of the younger generation, who was close to the older per-
 son and had shown an interest in the subject, to be present during the interview. Their
 presence would help trigger the memory of the interviewee. They would say for example:
 ‘Father or mother, do you remember you did so and so when you worked the land, or when
you were doing so and so..., you would sing this particular song?’ They would start singing
the song and the parent would then continue. In that way the younger generation per-
 formed the role of enhancer of memory.
      In other cases I interviewed the informants while at work washing clothes, preparing
food, working on the land, burning charcoal, cuddling their grandchildren or singing
songs. This also helped them to recall certain events, as they associated what they were
doing at that moment with past activities. This association was present in the way they
talked about life. In most conversations people would not tell their stories in a linear way,
but cyclically, going back and forth in time, comparing past with present.
      The reminiscences of the informants went back to things their grandparents had told
them. Often the presence of a member of the older generation was very important in their
lives. In the realm of the extended family, grandparents or other family members were
important transmitters of historical knowledge. Even when informants had not been born
during slavery, they were told of slavery by these relatives, who had had first-hand experi-
ences
     What other devices and methods have Afro-Curagaoans developed in order to remem-
ber their past? Walter Ong (2002) claims that people have developed so-called mnemonic
devices to organize and structure their thoughts in an attempt to ensure that information
considered essential for the existence of the self and of the community is remembered and
transmitted. The author gives some psychodynamics of orality which are applied in oral
culture to retain information for later recall. According to Ong, people think in memorable
thoughts, which are mnemonic patterns, shaped for ready oral recurrence. He gives as
examples heavily rhythmic, balanced patterns, repetitions or antitheses, alliterations and
assonances, epithetic and formulaic sayings and proverbs (2002:34).

The following part of an interview demonstrates a mnemonic pattern of repetition:

R.A.: Sefiora, su wela tabata traha pa shon?    _R.A.: Madam, did your grandmother work
                                               for the shon?
LS: Laga nos bisa, su kasd tabata fitó. Awor    1.S.: Let us say, her husband was an overseer.
ora nan yu a nase, nan no a bai biba niun       When their children were born, they did not
otro kaminda. Banda   pariba di kas  di shon, —go   and live elsewhere. At the eastern side of


                                                                                           35)
nan a traha un kas den kurá di Didi, Didi di      the house of the shon, they built a house in
Beri. Nos a lanta hana Didi di Beri ta mira       the yard of Didi, Didi, the son of Beri. We
bestia. Esei ta bestia e ta mira.                 grew up and found Didi, the son ofBeri,
                                                  looking after the animals.
R.A.: Tabatin mas hende ku ta traha ei?           R.A.: Were there more people working?
LS.: Si, hopi tabatin. Ku mi ta kòrda, tabatin    LS.: Yes, many. As I can recall, there was
Didi, tabatin nos tawela, vitó, anto tabatin      Didi, there was our grandfather, vito, and
Dochi, ku ta kasd ku mi tanta. Docht tabata       there was Dochi, who was my aunt’s hus-
wak kunuku, wak bestia. Manera shon               band. Dochi used to take care of the kunuku,
Manchi t’ei, ta shon Manchi su kunuku.            looked after the animals. You see shon
Tabatin tur kos den dje, fuera di bestia, pal’t   Manchi, it is his place. It had everything,
fruta... Tabatin un palu di mango dushi,          besides animals, fruit trees... It also had a
esei niun kriá no por kom’é. No tin mag. Bo       mango tree with delicious mangos. No ser-
por konvé si, pero hòrtá (hari). Shon no ke.      vant was allowed to eat the mangos from
Bo no por kom’é, anto di shon e ta. E ta un       that tree. You were not allowed. You could eat
mango grandi, dushi, anto nan a durve e           it, ifyou stole it (laughter). The shon did not
nomber di ‘webu di toro. Anto eset mester         allow it. You cannot eat it, as it belongs to the
bai kue apart pa shon. T’asina ta bida. Ora       shon. It was a big, sweet mango. They called
bo ta bou di palu, bo tin ku wanta lokual         it ‘bull’s balls. You had to pick that one apart
para hasi.’                                       for the shon. That is life. When you are under
                                                  a tree, you have to endure what the birds do.



With the proverb “When you are under a tree, you have to endure what the birds do’ the
informant summarized her thoughts and remembered the situation as it was. It thus
helped her putting the story in the right perspective. One technique utilized among Afro-
Cura¢aoans was repetition. By repeating certain types of information, which had been
transmitted by the older generation, the younger ones reproduced what they had been
told.
    This specific method for preserving and transmitting knowledge was also recognized
by Eduardo Tokaai, born in 1899. He remembered that when he was small, at home in the
evenings he and his brothers and sisters would gather in a circle around their father, who
would tell them stories. During the story-telling their father would stop and ask them what
he had talked about. Those who had forgotten were sanctioned verbally and mocked, while
those who remembered were praised. Here emphasis is put on the ability of a person to
reproduce a story as verbatim as possible.
    Similarly, Brenneker also pointed out that story-tellers always repeated the last words
of a sentence in their story before beginning a new one. According to him this was done in
order to allow the listeners to follow the story (1986:129). For the story-teller it was also a
way of structuring the theme and to make sure that the story followed the rules of narra-
tion. The same was apparent in the presentation of songs. There, the performer started by
repeating the first line several times. This way of introduction was called figurative, the
opening lines were referred to as ‘the door of the song’ (,porta di kantu) (1986:131).



36
The role of specialists in preserving memories has also been essential. In most oral cultures
we encounter professional poets and raconteurs who wander from place to place per-
forming. Others have some particular position or recognized poetic skill (Horton and
Finnegan 1973:120). On Curacao, certain gifted people made story-telling their profession
Jesurun 1899; Rutgers 1994:30). Good singers were known by the name ‘Bas’, corrupted
from the Dutch word baas, meaning boss. In the twentieth century people such as Cola
Susanna, Martili Pieters (Martilio Jacob Thomas), Imelda Valerianus and at the moment
Victor Batolomeo have played this role. In my research I make a distinction between these
specialists and the general public. As they are considered to be very knowledgeable, spe-
cialists are often called upon to talk of the past. This sometimes leads to the repetition of
information.
     During the interviews the observation of body language — all actions, gestures and nois-
es — was important. Did the informants hesitate when telling a certain passage of their story?
Did they pause? Did they try to evade a question and talk about other matters instead? What
did they repeatedly say? Did they show anger, humour or any other emotion? Did they make
any gestures? Did they make noises, such as chuckling, sucking their teeth etc? For example,
after the above interviewee mentioned that the mango’s could only be eaten if stolen (kom’é
st, pero hòrtá), she laughed. And on recalling the name (the balls of a bull) given to a mango,
she also laughed. In the transcriptions this information associated with body language was
written down as additional notes. The transcriptions were carried out verbatim.
     The use of humour in interviews to accentuate certain painful events or issues has
sometimes confused me, as one would rather expect anger to be expressed. In her study of
life under the Fascist regime in Italy, Luisa Passerini observes that people often recall trag-
ic events in their life in a humorous way. She believes that oral testimonies draw a veil over
tragic elements in people’s lives and bring out the symbolic overturning of order, similar
to carnival (1987:21).
    Difficulties arise due to some traditional Curagaoan songs being expressed in a now
extinct language, Guene. This language was developed as a means of communication
among the enslaved and persisted until the twentieth century. At present a few people
might still claim to sing in Guene, but are unable to translate the words into the creole lan-
guage Papiamentu. Nevertheless, they can explain what the songs are about.
    Scholars assume that most of the words relating to what people still call Guene are a
bastardization of the old language. One of them is Frank Martinus (1997), who deciphers
part of the language in order to analyse its contribution to Papiamentu. According to Wim
Rutgers (2001) the slaves sang in Guene to mislead their master. It was used as a secret lan-
guage to talk about their master. Later plantation owners became aware of this phenome-
non. This I deduced from an interview with someone knowledgeable about the language.
He stated that on some plantations the inhabitants were prohibited from singing in Guene,
as the owners suspected that they were singing about them. Guene was thus based on
secrecy; it permitted people to express their feelings in a concealed way. As late as the twen-
tieth century, songs in Guene served as vehicles for protest.’
    The literal transcriptions of oral data not only provide historical information regard-
ing events and certain aspects of life, but also help to uncover how this information was
memorized and transmitted. Informants would distinguish between what they had heard


                                                                                             ay
                                                                                             s
and what they had experienced themselves. For example, they would distance themselve
from the information by saying: ‘segun mi a tende’    (as I have heard it), or ‘nan di (so they
have said), or ‘mi a lanta tende’ (while I was growing up I heard). But when they wanted
to make precise comments, they would say: ‘segun mi mes a mira’ (as I have seen it myself),
‘mia mirele ku mi mes wowo’ (I have seen it with my own eyes) or by stressing ‘mi a mirele
ku e wowonan ku bichi lo kome un dia’ (I have seen it with these eyes which worms will
eat one day). Christine Hardung refers to these remarks as ‘indexical markers. These signs
are spontaneously interwoven within speech and allude to meanings in the narration.
They are tied directly to the presence of remembered experiences and are integrated into
the perspective of the speaker — thus demonstrating that the subject being described does
not concern a second-hand experience (Hardung 2002:41).
     Information would also be concealed through taking codes from their usual context
and transplanting them into another. For example, sometimes animal figures are used to
emphasize a point. In songs and stories particularly animal figures are recurring features
and serve to camouflage feelings not easily expressed openly. Thus the problem lies in
decoding these messages from their metaphorical meaning into a literal one, in order to
discover the symbols and meanings conveyed in them.
     Scholars such as Vansina have emphasized the use of myths in history and have stated
that in every community people have a representation of the origin of the world, of the
creation of mankind, and of their particular position as a community and as human
beings within this (Vansina 1985:21-3).
     It is also here that the use of written documents has proven essential. Sometimes one
interpretation is insufficient as data may have double entendre and varied readings. The
information may contain symbols with specific meanings relevant at the time and place of
their creation. Through the use of documents it is possible to place these symbols within
a historical timeframe. This was also understood by earlier folklorists, although, regretful-
ly, they provided little background information on the world outside the folkloric materi-
al they collected. Nevertheless, this information helps to discover formulas and devices
used for remembering and deciphering certain historical metaphors. The study of this
folkloric material in print enables stories, proverbs and songs expressed at a certain time
for a particular purpose to be revealed. These data give access to a culture existing at the
time of their documentation.
     The cross-checking of my material with that of Brenneker and Juliana was carried out
to this end. Brenneker was born in 1912 in Venlo, the Netherlands. He was ordained a
priest in 1932 and came to Curacao in 1939. From 1940 until 1946 Brenneker was a priest
in Kralendijk, Bonaire, where he collected and recorded some aspects of the island folklore
(1947).° In the nineteen fifties he returned to Curacao to continue documenting these data
until his death in 1996. Juliana, a Cura¢aoan, also developed an interest in the folklore of
the island. Originally a poet and a cultural performer, he began to collect oral material
during the nineteen sixties; he would later collaborate with Brenneker. Sometimes their
oral material was very useful in complementing the information I had gathered during my
research.




38
Cross-checking Oral Data with Written Documents
Paul Thompson has discussed the reliability of oral evidence (1978, 1988, 2000) and has
claimed that in order to evaluate the veracity of oral testimonies about the past it is impor-
tant to cross-check them with other documentation. This underlines what the anthropol-
ogist James Fentress and the historian Chris Wickham have stated, namely that oral tradi-
tion has revealed itself to be a valuable historical source when sifted, correlated and
cross-checked with any other evidence until a residuum is obtained which is acceptable as
truth (Fentress and Wickham 1992:76).’ One such source is the written documentation
through which oral material can be falsified and interpreted.
    Trouillot, however, has elaborated on the limitations of written documents and has
shown how historiography has neglected the ordinary people at four moments: the
moment of fact creation (the making of sources); the moment of assembling the facts (the
making of archives); the moment of fact retrieval (the making of narratives); and the
moment of retrospective significance (the making of history in the final instance)
(1995:26). The first moment’s neglect leads to an additional dilemma when studying writ-
ten documentation of the post-emancipation Caribbean: after emancipation the category
of ‘slave-master’ as an organizing principle no longer exists in these documents and Afro-
Curagaoans could be referred to as ‘blacks’ ‘working class’, ‘folk class’, ‘former enslaved’ etc.
There is thus no coherence in the labeling of people. This also hinders, of course, the
ordering of records (Scott 1988:408).
     In the case of Curacao, the written documents are official sources, stored at the nation-
 al archives on the island as well as in the Netherlands. For this study I began by consulting
the published colonial reports (Koloniale verslagen) from 1863 until 1917. Each year the
 Dutch colonial government composed these reports, giving an overview of how certain
matters had evolved during the preceding year in the colonies. Next I consulted the corre-
spondence between the district masters of several island districts. Following emancipation,
the colonial government divided the island into five districts and placed a master at the
head of each one. Their tasks were extensive: they had to look at whether the manumitted
former slaves continued working for the plantation owners; they were assistant officers to
the police and justice (and as such had to maintain law and order); they had to see to it
that the regulations regarding agriculture and animal husbandry were observed; they also
supervised the public roads and lands and kept an eye on the private properties; and they
acted as intermediaries between the government, land owners and the ordinary people.
They belonged to the upper class and to the group with power in society.
     Although there were some exceptions to the rule, generally they took the side of those
with power. When using these written documents, then, one should take into considera-
tion that those spoken for in these sources represented a different social group within the
existing power system (Scott 1990:2-3). The group with power is inextricably linked with
the creators of historical records: the same people that shape the relationship between
those with power and those without, also shape what people know about this relationship.
In that way the written material from this group is a representation of those with power in
society. Hence, one should evaluate these official historical sources in the light of power
relationships.



                                                                                              39
Scott indicated the interaction process between the powerful and the powerless, and its man-
ifestation in the written documents, with the term ‘public transcripts. According to him,
they do not portray the entire story of the relationships between different groups of unequal
power. The greater the differences between these groups, the more the relationship will be
stereotyped when documented(Scott 1990:2-3). Nevertheless, as the black popular class
could address its complaints to the district masters, these correspondences give a glimpse of
their way of life. The historian David Hall compares the use of this type of material with the
‘peeling of an onion until we reach a layer that is of the people’ (1984:10).
     I complemented the correspondence between the district masters with other written
documentation in order to provide a broader context within which to assess changes in the
lives of Afro-Curacaoans. They mostly contain information on policies and policy imple-
mentation, and are part of the colonial archives kept at the National Archives in The
Hague. In this respect, legal documents, such as the Rol van Strafzaken (List of Criminal
Cases, 1873-1917) stored at the National Archives in Willemstad, proved an interesting
source, helping to shed light on Afro-Curagaoan history.’
     My intention with regard to these records was twofold: not only to give insight into
conflicts and problems existing within the popular class, but also to reconstruct ordinary,
everyday assumptions. Even though the events in these cases are often extraordinary, the
records hold information on what people of the popular class considered important
enough to sue another person for. Also the making of laws indicates that certain regula-
tions needed to be introduced to regulate people’s behaviour. Laws give an excellent insight
into the attitudes of the people to whom they applied.
     The Roman Catholic Church is another source of valuable information. Its documents
are stored in the National Archives in Willemstad and in its own archives — both on the
island and in the Netherlands. These documents reveal the preoccupations of the elite class
with the life style of the populace. One cannot study life in the early post-emancipation
period without considering the influence of the Church. Letters, reports and articles by
priests recording their contacts with individuals of the popular class — some also talked
with the elderly in order to gain specific information regarding people or past events’ —
provide an interesting view on the ways in which the clergy exercised control over their
lives. In various documents priests have expressed their opinions on certain popular cus-
toms, thus showing an interest in them. Apart from constituting a source of information
on the Church’s civilizing mission, these documents reveal the response of the popular
class to this authority.



Cross-checking with Folkloric Data in Print
In order to contextualize my interviews I have tried to connect my own findings with other
recorded oral testimonies. These mainly entail the stories, folk tales, songs, proverbs and
surveys of customs published in magazines and books over the years. As stated, the prin-
cipal dilemma in dealing with oral sources is the lack of a timeframe. Here I will attempt
to address this problem by cross-checking them with contributions from the field of folk-
lore. Anthropology and folklore are closely related in the study of the lives
                                                                                          of


40
Afro-Curacaoans, as is the case throughout the Americas (Szwed and Whitten         1970:23).
 The folklore data in print enabled me to place my own research within a timeframe and to
 observe how oral information has developed over time.
     Historically, on Curacao oral information tended to be published under the term ‘folk-
lore." In general these data were studied by literary scholars who looked at style, character
 and symbolism in the same way as they did when studying literature. I will examine these
 data from a historical perspective. In order to utilize folkloric sources for the purpose of
writing history, it is necessary to determine their strengths and weaknesses. There are
methodological problems involved. Lawrence Levine, for example, cites difficulties in dat-
ing and determining the place of origin of this type of material. In the main, the identity
of the creator is unknown and the geographical distribution remains unclear (1983:338).
     Yet even though these data are not derived from perfect sources, they do shed light on
certain aspects of people’s lives. They are thus very helpful in gaining some sense of the
vision, values and aspirations of a group in the past, and help to understand the inner
dynamics, strategies and mechanisms employed to guard the members’ values and main-
tain a sense of worth (Levine 1983:338; Maza 1996:1495)." Folkloric data give a new
dimension to history, beyond the descriptive chronicles.
     On Curacao, the documentation of folklore started rather late and mainly in response
to interest from Europe and the United States. Folklore was recorded without any scientif-
ic pretension and most folklorists followed in almost identical fashion the leading practices
of Europe and North America. Areas receiving most attention were stories, songs and
proverbs. However, the local approach to folklore differed from the European approach in
its definition of ‘folk. In Europe the term related to peasants who under the impact of
industrialization became submerged and whom the educated gentry discovered as a group
with its own local stories, customs and beliefs. On Curagao, as in the United States, folk-
lore was not linked with the peasantry, but with ethnicity and race. Here, folkloric studies
dealt with the way of life of the black descendants of the enslaved.
     One of the earliest versions of Curagaoan folk tales in print was published by the Soci-
ety for the Study of History and Ethnology in 1899. In its third report the Society pub-
lished four Nanzi stories from Curacao. Considering the corpus of thirty Nanzi stories
later gathered by Nilda Geerdink-Jesurun Pinto (1952) it is likely that the collector of the
1899 publication made a selection. However, it is impossible to determine how and on
what grounds. The question as to whether these four stories were considered representa-
tive for the Afro-Curagaoan folk tradition remains unanswered.
    When using these sources for a historical purpose, scholars should also look at how
they were gathered. They should know as much as possible about the conditions under
which this process took place and about the attitudes of the collectors towards the materi-
al (Dorson 1983:334). Regarding the aforementioned four Nanzi stories, the anonymous
author does give the sources of his information. He stated that he had recorded them
directly from the mouths of elderly people, who claimed to have heard them when they
were young. Hence, we can deduce that these stories were passed on orally and that they
go back in history. Indirectly this also shows that Nanzi stories were present on Curacao
during the period of slavery, although there are no written data recording their existence
in that period.


                                                                                          41
                                                                                       of his
The collector does not mention whether his stories are verbatim reproductions
raconteurs or whether he left out certain passages. Most scholars    of folklore  studies are
confronted with this issue of censorship: material may have been altered by      leaving  out
certain parts of stories and songs deemed unfit by the collectors. In addition, the possibi-
lity of self-censorship — applied by the narrators or raconteurs themselves — needs to be
taken into account (Fentress and Wickham 1992:46).® One can make similar observations
regarding the stories of the same genre published in the Papiamentu newspaper La Cruz as
of 1900. Contrary to the four Nanzi stories printed in 1899, the newspaper placed these
stories without comment.”
     In 1926 H. van Cappelle published the Dutch versions of the same Curagaoan Nanzi
stories which had appeared in 1899. He did this together with stories from Suriname,
Jamaica and St. Eustatius, in doing so creating the first comparative collection in the field.
It is worth noting that in his introduction, van Cappelle acknowledges the historical value
of these stories. According to him, myths and legends preserve old memories and are faith-
ful reproductions of the thoughts people had regarding their lives. Van Cappelle also indi-
cated how he had collected the Surinamese stories, so that the methodological aspect of his
research can be evaluated (1926:197, 353).* He claimed that he had attempted to collect
stories on Curacao in the same way as he had done in Suriname, but had been unsuccess-
ful.
     Both the author in the aforementioned report of 1899 and van Cappelle refer to the
increasing interest in this type of information during that period.” Roman Catholic priests
contributed to this interest as they collected the stories or made them available in print.
Examples are the stories appearing in La Cruz. Between 1937 and 1940 the priest M.D.
Latour published several Nanzi stories in the West-Indische Gids in response to the aca-
demic demand for this type of material in the Netherlands."°
     Thus, when using these data for scientific study we must consider the motives for their
collection, since this influenced the method.” Interest in these materials does not neces-
sarily imply respect. The anthropologist Virginia Dominguez states (2000) that we should
look at the underlying goals of studies of this kind. Research in this field was mostly under-
taken to support the Darwinian, hierarchical relationship between cultures. On Curacao,
scholars interested in this type of information often displayed a somewhat ambivalent atti-
tude. Admittedly, four Nanzi stories were collected and documented. Yet their collector —
who chose to remain anonymous — expressed disdain in his introduction." He stated that
these stories were of a low moral level due to the story-tellers’ African origins, a continent
lacking civilization (Cuenta di Nansi 1899, 94-119). On this Latour also had a clear opin-
ion: while describing Nanzi as a ‘wise’ figure, in the sense that he was ‘sneaky and cunning,
while at the same time ‘unscrupulous and banally funny’ he stated that these stories con-
veyed no Christian values as they expressed the low moral views of the story-tellers (Latour
1937-1940). Roman Catholic newspapers would often cite the term kerementu den kompa
Nanzi, as synonymous with believing in non-existing phenomena.”
     Naturally, this ambivalence affected the manner in which the data were collected and
disseminated. The collectors had a negative regard for these stories, but by beginning to
collect them, they appeared to recognize blacks as bearers of culture, worthy of attention.
Furthermore, the collectors left out the physical and vocal expressions that formed part
                                                                                             of


42
the narrations. In general they did not consider these of importance. I consider this to be
incorrect. The verbalizations of story-tellers and their audience are manifestations of their
values and judgements regarding certain matters in people’s lives.
     In the aforementioned publication of 1899 the author did point out the multi-genre
aspect of these stories: the story-tellers made use of sign language, modulations and songs.
Latour, in his introduction, also mentioned that story-telling would generally be accom-
panied by body language: signs, mimicking and, at times, the imitation of animal sounds.”
Thus both authors made mention of the elements of performance within these stories.
Naturally, these do not manifest themselves on paper. Ruth Finnegan and other authori-
ties, such as Dan Ben-Amos and Harold Scheub, regard this as one of the principal short-
comings of the documentation of tales and songs in an oral performance. The data fall
short of conveying the ambiance of the event, as singers and narrators facing a live audi-
ence employ gestures, eye contact, intonation, pantomime, historionics, acrobatics and
sometimes costumes and props (Dorson 1972:11).
     Oral story-tellers often improvise to bring a story to life, and make it seem new by
using a different language, a detailed description of settings or magical props, verbal
emphases and different voices, salacious, satirical and moral comments and jokes, any
assortment of crashes, booms, growls and teeth-gnashing, scary faces and crepe on the
fire-lit wall. The gestures, intonations, bodily stances and facial expressions are cues in the
oral ambience, worthwhile paying attention to (Fentress and Wickham 1992:46; Tonkin
1992:38-40).
     Another shortcoming of most Curacaoan folklore data is that they were usually col-
lected outside of their social context (Dorson 1983:362). This is mainly the case with sto-
ries gathered at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century, when
story-telling was a vital part of the culture. Later it would become more difficult to collect
stories, let alone within a social context. Richard Bauman, one of the first to research folk
performances, emphasizes the importance of social context in the collection of these mate-
rials:

    the texts we are accustomed to view as the raw materials offolklore are merely the thin
   and partial record of deeply situated human behavior. If we are to understand what
   folklore is, we must go beyond a conception of it as disembodied super organic stuff and
   view it contextually, in terms of the individual, social and cultural factors that give it
   shape, meaning and existence (1983:362).

This social context includes the conditions under which the story-tellers interact with the
audience. What they choose to say is influenced by these conditions, which also means that
they receive immediate feedback. A narrative in print may be read centuries later, but it was
still produced under specific social and economic circumstances, by an author whose atti-
tude to a perceived potential audience may have affected the way he presented his materi-
al. In story-telling both the audience and the narrator affect the content and direction of
the narrative; hence any study of oral representation must take into account the contribu-
tions of both parties (Dorson 1983:362).



                                                                                                43
In addition, translating these stories from Papiamentu into Dutch may have led to the loss
of important elements. The translations lacked, for example, the numerous accompanying
sayings and proverbs providing us with information on the assumptions and ideas of peo-
ple in the past. Van Cappelle recognized this complication as early as the 1920s. Further-
more, the powerful expressions, interchanged with the sudden sound of soft whispering,
the repeated utterances, as well as the gesticulations and the singing of songs in the stories
could not to be translated (van Cappelle 1926:202).
    Due to the industrialization process, twentieth-century society underwent drastic
changes. This would lead to an increased interest in the waning folk culture within
Curacaoan society. Over the course of the second half of the century a series of works saw
the light of day, such as van Meeteren (1947), with Nanzi stories translated into Dutch,
Geerdink-Jessurun Pinto (1952), a collection of thirty Nanzi stories in Papiamentu, and
Jesurun (1955): the Dutch version of “Temekoe-Temebe’ a Nanzi story that had already
appeared in Papiamentu in the collection of 1899.”
     Geerdink-Jessurun Pinto’s compilation (1952) is a valuable contribution to folkloric
study as it contains the largest corpus of Nanzi stories in Papiamentu published up until
then. Since these stories were intended for a children’s programme on the radio, she pre-
sented expurgated versions by removing elements deemed improper for children (Baart
1983:14).% Her stories, then, are not a verbatim rendition of the original versions. Never-
theless, she recognized that besides being entertaining for children, these stories had a cer-
tain scientific value as one could determine the thoughts and values of the people through
them. Despite this ideological motivation, Geerdink-Jessurun Pinto undermined this value
by practicing censorship so that parts went unpreserved. Richard Wood at Louisiana State
University translated all but one of her stories into English (Geerdink-Jessurun Pinto
1973).*% Wood claims that Geerdink-Jesurun Pinto collected them from folklorists, teach-
ers and priests, who had in turn gathered them at the end of the nineteenth century from
the story-tellers themselves. Thus, besides her own censorship, these stories may already
have been expurgated by her sources.
    During the course of the twentieth century people began to realize that oral literature
entailed more than only Nanzi stories: tales of other genres were published as well. Exam-
ples include Braasem (1956), Henk Dennert (1968), May Henriquez (ca. 1981) and Juliana
(1970).” Even so, Nanzi stories still form a large part of our folkloric material, as they were
the most thoroughly documented (Baart 1985; Rutgers 1991).
    According to Juliana, the relatively high quality of documentation on Curacao arises
from the fact that these stories transcended class and ethnic barriers as they were often told
by the nannies (yaya’s) to the children of the elite class. Nannies played an important role
in the care of these children and in that way served as transmitters of Afro-Curacaoan
cultural elements. Most of the earlier folklorists belonged to the elite class. These people
were already familiar with the stories as they had either heard them in their youth from the
yaya's or had known people who passed them on — as such they were important elements
in bridging the divide between the popular and the elite class. In contrast, other stories
were told behind closed doors, either within the private sphere of the home or as part of
ceremonies such as the ocho dia, in which rarely a member of the elite participated.”



44
It remains unclear why these Nanzi stories were accepted by the elite and even found suitable
as children’s stories, unlike other genres. Herskovits (1941:139) claims that certain African
cultural elements could persist depending on the slave-master’s attitude towards them, which
could range from hatred and distrust to indifference and encouragement. For example, quiet
and calm stories generally found more acceptance. Another contributing aspect to their
acceptance was their entertainment value, with their trickster-plots and motifs, which were
similar to some European stories. Furthermore, the increased attention to Nanzi stories on
Curacao was related to their popularity among the Afro-Curacaoan population.
    As the Nanzi stories have been more thoroughly documented than others, a broader
scientific approach has become possible. They are not timeless as they have been subject to
alteration over time, with their main elements remaining in tact. Baart (1983) links the sto-
ries collected by Geerdink-Jessurun Pinto to those of West African origin and indicates
some changes in the Curacaoan versions. In his comparison of several published
Cura¢aoan Nanzi stories of the same title and theme he found variations in the recordings
of a single story over the course of time. These changes demonstrate how a theme was
adapted to the audience, which also indicates specific values prevalent at the time (Bau-
man 1992:xiv).



Recorded Folk Songs
At present folk songs are also used as historical sources of knowledge. The folklorist and
musicologist Alan Lomax has emphasized this development and claims that of all oral
expressions — including stories, proverbs, riddles and sayings — songs are the most important
indicators of socio-cultural life. In a society characterized by an extensive oral culture, songs
help to direct the attention of the group, to organize the group around a common reaction,
and thus create consensus. Their lyrics reveal values that are not openly manifested in every-
day life; they often address deep feelings, the verbalization of which is prohibited in other
contexts (Lomax and Halifax 1971). Also for Bauman (1983:362), they uncover deeply root-
ed human behaviour. As they help to expose communal values, norms and perceptions — if
systematically analysed — they are considered meaningful sources for gathering data on the
way people viewed themselves and their social reality (Lomax and Halifax 1971).
    As was the case with stories, the systematic recording of traditional songs began very
late on the island. In the United States Slave Songs of the United States, by W.F. Allen et al.,
was already published in 1867. It comprised a collection of songs recorded directly from
former slaves. Also in most other parts of the Caribbean, music and songs have long been
studied by scholars such as Walter Jekyll (1907), Herskovits (1941), Harold Courlander
(1939, 1960, 1963) and Fernando Ortiz (1950).
    Some scholars attribute the late recording of traditional songs on Curagao to the fact
that they persistently remained part of the living folk culture. Thus they continued to play
a role in society (Broek 1992; Ansano et al. 1992). Another explanation is related to the
general tendency by collectors of folklore to pay more attention to stories. Documenting a
song meant taking down both its melody and its text. Tales were easier to assemble and to
publish. A final explanation revolves around the negative ideas harboured by those able to


                                                                                              45
                                                                               done in a frag-
record them. As a result, the registering of traditional songs was generally
mentary manner and mostly induced by a growing interest from outside the island.
                                                                                         inter-
    This is illustrated in the travels by the priest ‘Ipi’ from Curacao”, who met with
                                                                                      Upon his
est in Curacaoan folk songs during a trip around the United States in 1884.
return, Ipi admitted in the Amigoe       of 28  June  1884   that when asked by his  American
friends to sing songs from Curacao, at first he had started to sing Spanish songs, but then
his fellow travellers had forced him to sing folk songs from the island. As he was unfamil-
iar with these, he decided to sing a kantika di makamba consisting of sentences of differ-
ent songs, which did not make any sense at all when put together. This kantika di makam-
ba refers to songs which are sung in the extinct African derived language Guene. This is the
song ‘Ipi’ sang (it is impossible to translate due to its incoherent language use)”*:

Dio manoeé
cominda wese
ma bini di awana
Jantje poco bon ;com bai toer bo roeman?
we sali hende di anoche a sali
pa ta lezi
hoenja lamanta para
lamanta para Dio
ke toe mi man?
Tené mas duro
Tené cha fla mi
Koe mi bai foi mundoe, mi ta jora mundoe
Ta nada. Dio tat Awé ta awé
Go teme vola.


On viewing the text of Ipi’s made-up song, it seems that he used phrases of several kanti-
ka di makamba; songs such as ‘Kumbai yaya, Kuminda Wese, Awe ta awe’ and ‘Ku mi bai
for di mundu, which would at a later stage be integrally collected by researchers such as
Juliana, Brenneker, Rosalia, La Croes and myself. Nevertheless, even though this kantika di
makamba seemed no more than an incoherent enumeration of fragments, it suggests that
Ipi must have had some notion of this type of music. It is precisely because of this frag-
mented annotation that certain data can be placed in their historical context.
     Cobi (Lodowicus Jansen), Ipi’s brother, who proved more knowledgeable about kanti-
ka di makamba — even though he lived in town and Ipi in the countryside: one would
assume that country people were generally more knowledgeable about Afro-Curacaoan
popular culture — underlined the multi-generic aspect of Afro-Curacaoan folklore and
stated that often these songs formed part of stories. Furthermore, he understood that they
were worthwhile preserving as they were transmitted solely by the elderly and so in dan-
ger of disappearing. He did not, however, define the term ‘makamba’. Neither did he spec-
ify the language in which most of these songs were sung.
    Cobi issued two kantika di makamba. The first told of an owner who treated his slaves
badly. When one day he went to look for water he fell into a well. His crying for help was
in vain; the slaves sang that the owner had fled (Rutgers 1994:48).” The lyrics as explained


46
by the priest express a common belief among Afro-Curacaoans that an accidental death is
a punishment for bad and inhuman behaviour. The second song was about a Dutch shon
from La Guaira, Venezuela, who was so rich that he rode in a carriage decorated with dia-
monds.” Cobi related to Ipi that he knew many more songs.
    The interest in these songs of father Jansen, alias Cobi, is further manifested in a
 request in the newspaper La Union of 2 April 1890, asking readers to send him kantika di
 makamba. A month earlier, Cobi had mentioned in the same paper songs such as ‘Foe-
 doewe’, ‘Guiara’ and ‘Hoenja lamanta para’, which he claimed were sung during the har-
vesting of maize. His petition would prove in vain — in 1953 Latour revealed that Cobi had
 never received any replies.”
     Under specific circumstances the priests in the countryside would allow people to play
their own music. In 1858, for example, when the construction of the church of Willibror-
dus was finished, those who had helped building it were rewarded with music created by
an old plough”, the sound of half a calabash in water” and the blowing of a cow horn.”
Sometimes priests would not mention the actual songs, but only the occasions on which
they were sung. In 1902, for example, it was mentioned in La Cruz that when people were
loading ships, they would do so while singing songs.” By mentioning this, they recognized
that Afro-Curacaoans used songs and music as an outlet to alleviate hard work.
     Catholic priests proved to be primary collectors of folk songs, especially of those
appearing harmless and unprovocative to their moral standards. Thus it is not surprising
that the genre most often documented were set songs, which were sung during the cere-
mony of harvesting the maize. These songs were regarded as seemingly innocent expres-
sions of gratitude for a good harvest and less threatening to moral standards than the
tambu songs accompanied by the drum (itself also called tambú), which were sung after
the maize had been stored. In April 1890, the priest Jansen (Cobi) asked people to sing
their seú songs, rather than engaging in the tambu.” Jan Paul Delgeur, who in 1924 in the
Amigoe condemned the tambú, had earlier published a sei song in the same paper.” It had
been created to commemorate the priest acquainting the parishioners with a new type of
maize.
     Different versions of the same songs were collected both on Curagao and on Bonaire,
which allowed for comparisons to be made. The priest B. Krugers describes some customs
and cites fragments of songs related to the harvest feast on Bonaire called stmadan (1907:8-
9). In 1934 an article entitled ‘Simadam’ would appear in the same magazine by W. de Bar-
banson (1934:25-39), a priest in the village of Rincon on Bonaire in that year. The follow-
ing year he left for the island of St. Barths. He presented L.C. Panhuys with his data, who
had during 1932-1934 written several articles on the folk life of Bonaire in the West-Indi-
sche Gids (Panhuys 1933-1934b). In one of these articles Panhuys recommended the con-
tinued recording of songs in a similar way to that of the clergy, who had documented other
customs before they became extinct.”
    Panhuys had also published articles focusing on songs in Surinamese folklore. The
importance of his work lies in the fact that he internationalized these songs as early as
1909, when he presented a paper on songs of Suriname at the International Congress of
Americanists in Vienna and in 1912 his work was translated into French under the title Les
chansons et la musique de la Guyana Neerlandaise (van Zanten and van Roon 1995:11).


                                                                                         47
Panhuys discussed de Barbanson’s method of collection: the priest would record a song
and then ask people from Curacao and Bonaire whether they knew it. Lacking modern
audio-recording equipment, the priest recorded only the texts. In some of his articles he
mentioned different variants of songs. Some, such as ‘Bati Lala’ (Beat Lala), ‘Panama mi ke
bai’ (To Panama I want to go) and ‘Akili Mambea’ which he registered on Bonaire, had dif-
ferent versions on Curacao.
    As with traditional songs, the recording of kantika di tambu on Curacao began very
late.” The tambú was a ceremony accompanied by music and dancing, which was per-
formed around the end and the beginning of each year — specifically at Christmas and New
Year. The lyrics often commented on events that had happened during the year and which
were generally disapproved of. They also referred to individuals, either from the in- or out-
group, who had misbehaved and were usually sung by women. The songs created a kind of
cohesion and solidarity, and thus reinforced societal values. Sometimes they were aimed at
soliciting and arousing outside support and sympathy for a person or situation.
     Since the sexual content of these songs was considered immoral by the Catholic
Church, very few were recorded by priests. Early references show the stereotypical ideas
surrounding them. No civilized person was expected to have anything to do with the
tambú. Niewindt, for example, condemned the tambu when in 1850 he referred to the cus-
tom as the ‘so-called singing or rather shouting of shameless negresses’ (Niewindt in
Dahlhaus 1924:441). The same condemnation is present in a publication of the agrono-
mist R.H. Rijkens, who accused the blacks of being dirty, drunkards and thieves. “Their
singing, he wrote, ‘tortures the civilized ear, as their voice has been damaged by bad qua-
lity rum’ (Rijkens 1907:58).
     Nevertheless de Barbanson would at least partially overcome his prejudice against col-
lecting tambu songs as he mentioned several in his article ‘Simadan’ on Bonaire (1934).*°
On that island both the drum and the tambú songs were called bari. He emphasized their
double meaning. Brenneker and Juliana gathered the tambt songs more systematically.
Their collection will be assessed in the final paragraph of this Chapter. Also René Rosalia’s
aforementioned thesis (1997) was partially based on his collection of tambú songs.



Papiamentu Sayings and Proverbs in Print
The sociologist G. Llewellyn Watson defines a saying as a phrase employed to warn, to
remonstrate or to implant the fear of retribution or social control in the consciousness of
the listener: the person or persons who need to grasp a situation. He describes a proverb
as a short, well-known saying, wise percept or maxim used for a long time by many peo-
ple to express a truth or point out a moral lesson (Watson 1991:1-2). Scholars such as A.K.
Awedoba argue against this definition as it ignores the importance that some societies
attach to linguistic and literary features associated with the proverb — ‘especially the sharp
wit, sarcasm, humour, rhetoric, aesthetic and poetic values of language use’ (Awedoba
2000:31). Frequently my informants would use proverbs during interviews, either to lay
down cautions, warnings and social ideals, or to reveal certain attitudes considered impor-
tant in social life. They were also used to trigger reflection and thought, to encourage good


48
sense and to remind oneself to weigh carefully all the possible consequences of one’s
actions when pursuing daily interests and activities.
    The study of proverbs is useful for determining the values, principles and social norms
guiding the behaviour of people (Dorson 1983:184). Historically there has been an inter-
est in Papiamentu proverbs. Although until the beginning of the twentieth century this
language was generally considered primitive, the registering of Papiamentu proverbs can
be traced to the early documentation of folk narratives. Since proverbs were usually com-
ponents of stories, they were included when these stories were written down. In that sense
the Nanzi stories published by the Society for the Study of History and Ethnology, as well
as those in the Roman Catholic weekly La Cruz, are important databases. As with other tra-
ditions, the Roman Catholic priests were the primary collectors. They would, for example,
request their readers to supply them with proverbs, as was the case during the first decades
of the twentieth century, when the editor of La Cruz repeatedly asked readers to send in
proverbs in Papiamentu. He would then proceed to publish those that were nicely corrob-
orating, or at least not defying Roman Catholic moral principles (Broek 1992). In that way
the proverbs were used in the classical sense: as didactic forms of speech.
    The earlier collectors often explained their motivation and underlined their respect for
these proverbs. Cohen Henriquez and D.C. Hesseling, for example, stated that although
some were taken from non-documented stories, songs, riddles and legends, this did not
mean that they were less literary than, for example, Spanish proverbs. These two scholars
were the first to compile a study on Papiamentu and Sranan proverbs, published in 1935
as an article in De West-Indische Gids. It was also the first comparison of proverbs
expressed in two creole languages spoken in the Dutch Caribbean.
    During the course of the twentieth century further collections of proverbs would
become available. The Proverbionan Papiamentu, printed in 1946 by La Cruz, contains a
large number. In 1948 Latour gave some examples of proverbs in his article on folklore.
Scholars such as van Meeteren (1947), Antoine Maduro (1959, 1960, 1967, 1969), Bren-
neker (1963), Juliana (1963), Peter Hoefnagels and W. Hoogbergen (1980, 1985, 1991) also
dedicated much time to the gathering of proverbs. The book 2000 proverbio i ekspreshon
by Renée Hendrikse-Rigaud (1994) contains the largest collection to date.
    Some collectors would indicate the sources of the proverbs. The collector of Proverbio-
nan Papiamentu elaborated on his method. He indicated that following his request in the
newspaper, he had received about 4000 proverbs from Curacao, Aruba and Bonaire. He
selected 1364 of these for inclusion in his book. The publication was intended as a begin-
ning and not as an end in itself. He asked people ‘who loved their language’ to react and
point out those which were correct and those which were not, and to offer a meaning and
explanation, in order to develop a more accurate edition of the book. From his approach
it can be concluded that the author supposed that the people had some intuitive notion of
what a proverb was and was not.
     To understand the meaning of the proverbs used among Afro-Curagaoans we need to
consider how they themselves made sense of them within the context of their language and
society. In answering this question the article by Cohen Henriquez and Hesseling (1935)
may give certain leads, as it was one of the first analytical studies on the subject. They cat-
alogued 300 Papiamentu proverbs which they had received through three intermediaries:


                                                                                            49
two women and one man. These proverbs related to subjects such as animals, plants,
nature, food and drink, family life, beliefs and body parts. They compared the 300 proverbs
with 707 Sranan and 2200 Spanish proverbs. Their conclusion: people who live close to
nature express this in their proverbs, revealing that Papiamentu-speaking people were less
close to nature than the Surinamese (41.1 per cent of the Papiamentu proverbs referred to
animals and nature whereas in Suriname this figure was 50.3 per cent). Moreover, the ani-
mal figures, especially of those non-existent on Curagao — such as tigers”, elephants and
monkeys — were regarded as relics from their African past (Henriquez and Hesseling 1936,
1937)
    Latour also studied the use of animal figures in proverbs. He paid attention to what he
called ‘the placing of a proverb in the mouth of an animal’. For example: ‘Kacho di: Taco,
taco, di mi ta di mi, di bo ta di bo’ (The dog said: Bow wow, mine is mine and yours is
yours). Henriquez had found the following variant: ‘Kacho ta bebe awa: Tekum tekum, di
mi ta di mi, di bo ta di bo’ (The dog drinks water: Tekum* tekum, what is mine is mine,
and what is yours is yours, in other words: everyone takes their share).
   The majority of these studies do not explain why animal figures are so prominent in
Papiamentu proverbs. Watson      (1991), who studied proverbs in Jamaican folk culture,
notes the conspicuous use of animal figures in this culture, where analogies are frequent-
ly drawn between humans and other living creatures. The Jamaican belief that the animals
of the field and the birds in the air hold important clues as to the mysteries of the universe
— with their actions being an indication of things to come, such as rain or even death — also
holds true for Curagaoan society.
    One large omission in all these collections is that they lack context. This should not be
overlooked, as a close relationship exists between context, function and meaning (Arewa
and Dundes 1964:70-85). Proverbs as linguistic units are subject to general language rules,
but their specific meaning is generated in usage. In that sense it is impossible to explain
their meaning without referring to their context. For example, proverbs were used as a
didactic device for adult members of the popular class — as shown in the case of the
Catholic priests and their newspapers (Awedoba 2000:36).*
    The popular class used proverbs to educate their siblings. Thus, children were warned
that “Yu ku no ta tende ku mama, ta kai den boka di kolebra’ (Children who do not listen
to their mother will fall into the snake’s mouth). In various traditional Curacaoan stories,
songs and other oral testimonies, proverbs are also used to accentuate a certain idea. In
many ways they give us insight into philosophical outlooks, as they were intended to put
across a moral point. For example, the proverb ‘Pa sabi ku shon Arei tabata, el’ a larga
Nanzi gan’é’ (Even though shon Arei*® was wise, Nanzi was able to fool him) emphasizes
that the weak can stand up to the strong, by using their wits (La Cruz, 1946).
    The next proverb, ‘Banana ta muri vipe lo tei’ (The banana tree will die but the sprout
will remain), was often mentioned by interviewees to reflect on continuity in the broadest
sense of the word.” Here Brenneker and Juliana collected it as part of a song:


Banana ta muri vipe lo tei                      The banana tree will die but there will be
                                                sprouts



50
Banana ta muri na mundu vipe lo tei              The banana tree will die in the world, but there
                                                 will be sprouts
Banana ta muri vipe lo tei.”                     The banana tree will die but there will be
sprouts.


Proverbs may also occur in serious discussions and arguments. They may serve to clinch
an argument or as a means of illustrating logic (Awedoba 2000:35). For example, the say-
ings Mi no ke mir’é ni pinta’ (I cannot stand the sight of him) and ‘Tira e jabi na laman’
(Throw the key into the sea) are used in the following song to highlight the point that a
relationship has definitely ended:

Dalia” a lagami sabi ta kiko a sosedé             My love has asked me what is the matter
Ku mi no kier mir’é ni pinta                      Why I can’t stand the sight of him
Mi a kontest’é                                    I answered him
Ku mi a tira e yabi na laman                      That I have thrown the key into the sea
Telela telela.                                    Telela telela.


Particular mention should be made here of the banderita: a short verse in which a person
gives a veiled criticism of another in a ceremony at the end of the year. These verses were
popular around the end of the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth cen-
tury and may have contributed to certain sayings (Berry-Haseth 1994). At the end of each
year, people could buy the banderitas most applicable to their feelings. They were often
used as lyrics for the tambu and then sung communally.
    To conclude, proverbs are prime indicators of how people reflected upon their lives.
Their use in interviews served to emphasize the importance of certain matters.



Life of the Popular Class
The life of the popular class has not only been recorded by story-telling and singing. Other
aspects of daily life have also been collected. In order to get an idea of the life of the pop-
ulace in nineteenth-century Curacao these need to be studied.
    John de Pool was one of the first authors to make a contribution to this field of study
(1935). Even though he generally cast folk customs in a negative light, he gave insight into
the cultural life of the popular class by referring, for example, to customs such as the cer-
emony of the ocho dia and the stick fight at the harvest feast of seu and the tambu. His
book contains many personal observations and commentaries, and in this way provides
important source material. However, it expresses prejudice against blacks and therefore
needs to be consulted with this in mind.
    Another important book about folk customs on Curacao is the previously mentioned
Volkskunde van Curacao by van Meeteren (1947). According to Latour (1948a) the book
was exclusively based on oral testimonies, which are difficult to collect on the island as gen-
erally people do not like speaking about these matters — they tend to view them as foolish
reminiscences — and when they do not know an answer they tend to invent one. Van


                                                                                               5
Meeteren himself seemed influenced by Jos Schrijnen, a leading specialist in Dutch folk-
lore (1930-1933). Van Meeteren describes wide ranging folkloric aspects in the life of Afro-
Curacaoans. He occupied himself with phenomena suiting the folkloric canon — cere-
monies, rituals, beliefs, clothes, food, manners    and musical expressions. His book is,
however, a description of certain picturesque aspects rather than a study of their overall
contribution to Curagaoan culture.
    Van Meeteren was interested in the origins of specific customs and their comparison
with customs in other societies, in line with other early folkloric scholars in Europe. His
work reveals an evolutionist approach. According to him, culture developed in stages. He
viewed the Dutch culture as the highest one on the Netherlands Antilles. For both van
Meeteren and the Catholic clergy the folk ideal corresponded to the anthropologist Robert
Redfield’s conception of folk (1941). According to this, folk was visible in homogeneous
communities: small and isolated, attached to traditional concepts of descent, and guided
by simple technology and gender division. Van Meeteren describes customs that de Pool
had regarded as primitive and barbaric. A few years earlier, de Pool had thanked the cler-
gy for their eradication (1935).
    Why, then, did van Meeteren focus so much attention on the behaviour patterns and
beliefs of a culture long repressed and judged uncivilized? Firstly, it is important to point
out that he wrote Volkskunde van Curacao on request. Part of it had been presented three
years earlier on ‘Curom, the local radio. At the time these customs were already on the
verge of disappearing. His task was then to document these threatened customs. Latour
emphasized the importance thereof when he stated: “Curagao has its particularities which
are slowly threatening to disappear. If wise people do not write down everything what
exists now and study them, soon it will be too late?”
     Secondly, the study of Afro-Curacaoan customs did not necessarily imply respect. On
Bonaire, for example, priest de Barbanson who documented traditional songs, would cas-
tigate — according to oral history — those found playing and singing the bari.’ Another
priest, Latour, compared the continuation of the tambu to the preservation of the custom
of head-hunting in New Guinea (1953). Van Meeteren himself saw the clergy as an educa-
tional, civilizing force and he shared this conviction with many of his contemporaries.
They observed, with anxiety, the rapid changes within the societies of Aruba and Curacao
due to the industrialization process with its concomitant introduction to ‘modern’ life and
the influx of immigrants with different life styles.
     As a consequence of modernization, the working class was no longer isolated. But the
new media — such as film, theatre, radio and magazines — were seen by the clergy as a threat
to their ‘civilizing’ mission. At that point in time the populace was no longer considered
barbaric and primitive — as had been the case in the nineteenth century — but as people in
the process of being civilized. This mission was now threatened by seemingly uncontrol-
lable outside forces. Therefore the interest in what was seen as folklore originated from the
fear of a particular group losing its power over the powerless. As in Europe, interest in folk-
lore emanated from nostalgia; however, on Curacao, the nostalgia manifested itself in an
urge to preserve the status quo by controlling the minds of the members of the popular
class.



5
Since van Meeteren does not provide any information pertaining to this, it is difficult to
evaluate the method he used for collecting his data. His sources were indirect: not infor-
mants but intermediaries. It is also hard to find out exactly who his intermediaries were,
and thus how knowledgeable they were on these issues. Related to this is their ‘openness’
towards someone like van Meeteren — representing the prejudiced elite class. Nevertheless,
his book does provide an interesting insight into some aspects of life of the popular class.
With it, van Meeteren established himself as one of the leading lights in the field of folk-
lore, for which he was referred to by Latour as ‘konosedó di pueblo’ (the connoisseur of the
popular class)”



Cross-checking with the Brenneker/Juliana               Collection

The prime ethnographic collection of Curagaoan traditional culture is the corpus pro-
vided by Brenneker and Juliana. Even though these scholars also worked individually,
they usually collaborated and their body of work is commonly referred to as the Bren-
neker/Juliana collection. It has become a model for this type of research on the island —
no study concerned with the oral history and tradition of Curacao can overlook their
work.
    I was able to collect a number of songs on Curacao which Brenneker and Juliana had
previously recorded. The fact that I could record songs in the 1980s which they had already
collected during the 1950s and 1960s, from informants older than mine, suggests that these
songs were communal and passed on from one generation to the next. In his study on the
Calypso Keith Warner (1982) explains that for the text of a song to be remembered, it
should be so powerful that it can stand on its own. Through these songs people symboli-
cally construct their world and tailor it with meaning.
    Juliana and Brenneker made use of a significant development in the study of folklore,
folk life and related studies, which is the sound recording of data. The availability of mod-
ern tape recording equipment made this possible. This process led to the verbatim preser-
vation of data as primary source material — available and accessible to fellow scholars
(Perks and Thomson 1998). This new method of collecting and recording oral data also
found acceptance on Curagao.
   Both Brenneker and Juliana considered the folk culture in black rural communities the
authentic expression of the folk character. They usually contrasted rural life with sophisti-
cated, urban life. Banda Bou in particular — the western part of the island — was, due to its
isolation, considered an area where this information was conserved in its purest form.
Most of their interviewees were thus elderly people who lived in the countryside, the
largest number coming from Banda Bou and from the centre of the island. Fewer infor-
mants came from Banda Riba, while only a few lived in town. However, the data regarding
the area of origin of the informants should be handled with some care. Some of the geo-
graphic places registered by Juliana and Brenneker existed both in Banda Bou and Banda
Riba. Furthermore, they usually noted the place where they conducted their interviews,
which was not necessarily the place where the interviewee had been born or had grown up.
In need of care, some had moved in with a family member who lived elsewhere.


                                                                                           23
Behind the ideas expressed in folklore, Brenneker and Juliana saw the wisdom ofthese long
neglected and supposedly underdeveloped people. Their knowledge and intelligence, root-
ed in nature, was a ‘counter-culture’ to that of the elite. Brenneker’s interest had been
induced by his vision that missionary work must be based on knowledge of the culture of
a people.” Juliana presented his ideas on folk culture as the antithesis to technological
development in a series of books entitled Guia Etnologiko (1976 and 1977b). For both
ethnographers the authentic Curagaoan culture lay in a life of the past in the countryside,
a life which was rapidly disappearing. The older generations, then, were knowledgeable
and provided a link to this culture. For Juliana, this search was also driven by personal
interest. He distinguished himself as the first black Curacaoan to focus attention on this
type of study: previously both the local black population and the white elite had
approached this material with disdain. The elite would remain anonymous when writing
on the subject, while the local population would rather not dwell on it.
     It would take a long time to get their concepts recognized by the central and island gov-
ernments.” Their response to folklore related studies was one of disinterest. This would
manifest itself in a lack of funding, resulting in Brenneker and Juliana collecting the mate-
rial largely at their own expense. Due to this lack of funds they were sometimes forced to
erase and re-use tapes, thus losing the original information. Only during the 1980s limit-
ed support was given by the AAINA. However, when the economic situation on the island
deteriorated, this soon evaporated.
     Both ethnographers developed a special approach in order to induce their interviewees
to talk. This was vital, since at the time people were often ashamed of their past clouded
by slavery and poverty. Questions on the subject would easily be interpreted as prying. To
overcome this hurdle, Brenneker and Juliana would avoid any direct questions, but instead
sit with the interviewees and chat about whatever subject arose. After a time, as they gained
the trust, they would explain that they could not remember all that was being said and that
therefore they had to either write down the words or tape them. People who initially had
been reserved, would then open up. They would become accustomed and not mind
singing or talking on tape. For Juliana, this indirect approach was the only methodologi-
cally correct way of conducting oral research. He denounced the direct, authoritative,
methods of earlier folklorists: they had had insufficient knowledge of the mentality and
customs of the older generations and had lacked respect (Juliana 1976).
    Brenneker and Juliana complemented one another in their methodology. The fact that
Brenneker was a Catholic priest made him more readily accepted by the locals. In most
interviews he would be addressed as ‘father’ and treated with respect. But some of his ques-
tions would reveal his position — particularly when they dealt with issues such as belief —
and his being a priest may also have affected the response. Juliana’s status as an insider,
already familiar with key knowledge and traditions of society, would give him many
advantages (Clemencia 2004).” When he was present at an interview, he would jog the
memory of the informant by asking questions such as ‘tell me about so and so... did you
know so and so...?” Or he would start talking about an event, and the informant would
continue to give more in-depth information.
    Also in other ways they distanced themselves from earlier folklorists. Unlike, for exam-
ple, van Meeteren, they systematically collected and recorded data in all parts of the island.


54
Their material is thus extensive. As they were also in time to collect stories and songs from
elderly narrators and singers who at the time were still alive, they were able to record
numerous versions, of songs in particular. Their attention was not limited to specific areas:
all aspects of daily life were addressed. As such, they made live recordings of customs like
the ocho dia ceremonies, with their special songs of ‘dumve’, and they also paid attention
to the tambu, which former folklorists had either neglected or written negatively about.
     Brenneker’s ideas on the tambu ceremony are well stated in his series of books entitled
Sambumbu (1969-1975). He even felt a certain relief that the feast was being revived. In
that way, he set himself apart from older priests of the Catholic Church, who had regard-
ed the tambu as devilish and would go on horseback to break up tambu gatherings with
their whips. Although these gatherings were therefore generally considered indecent and
thus condemned, Brenneker and Juliana made live recordings of them.” In doing so they
attempted to capture the performance aspect, an important element of their manifesta-
tion. In the recordings one can hear the laughter and cheers of the crowd when the singer
would arouse support and sympathy for someone or a situation. This exchange between
singer and audience was incited by the use of cunning word play and double meanings; the
texts received much attention and had to be carefully thought out in order to trigger a
response.
    At times Brenneker and Juliana were criticized, and also gossiped about for their
engagement in this type of activity. Following his weekly column in the Amigoe, in which
he had talked about the spirits of the dead and even mentioned names of people who had
died in a car accident a few days earlier, Brenneker was reproached by an anonymous
writer for this unpriestly behaviour:

   Referring to the sambumbu of January 12, I would like to ask father Brenneker thefol-
   lowing. How do you know so well that the young man is Pedro Kook. Let him rest in
   peace. What you are doing is not priestly work, father Brenneker. In that way you are
   collaborating to the down-fall of the Roman Catholic faith on the island. That ís a
   shame for a father.”

In order to make their data accessible to a broader public and safeguard them for posteri-
ty, Brenneker would publish regularly in the Amigoe and talk on the radio, while Juliana
would also appear on radio and television programmes. In some of their publications they
would explain the existence of a specific custom in relation to its function. Juliana in par-
ticular made attempts to link certain expressions to Africa and the Caribbean. Brenneker
tried to explain unknown words in Papiamentu and in Guene, for which he was criticized
by the Papiamentu specialist Antoine Maduro.
   Brenneker and Juliana were the first to submit their research to the archives. In 1973
they placed them in a foundation under the name of Zikinza. The corpus of this collection
consists of over 1400 songs, stories and short narratives, collected on tape from 267
informants.” They are currently stored at the National Historical Archives in Willemstad.
    Though Brenneker and Juliana were amateur researchers, they both compiled a great
corpus of data archived for future researchers. Neither received formal training in inter-
view techniques. Their extensive interviews must therefore be analyzed with caution. They


                                                                                           59
                                                                                   expertise to
appear to have elicited reminiscences with great skill, but may have lacked the
avoid socially desirable comments from their informants.
    Moreover, their gender may have hampered their research with regard to female issues,
such as childbirth, menstruation, virginity and conflicts between men and women.
    In order to get an overview of the information, I have divided their informants into five
categories. The first concerns those born before 1863, the second the group born between
1863 and 1883, the third the group born between 1883 and 1903, the fourth those born
after 1903 and the last category the group of which the age was not registered. Especially
those in the first category were of interest to me, as in my research I was unable to find any-
one who was born before 1883.

      Table 2.1 Number of Informants in the Zikinzá-Collection According to Age Group


                Born before        Born between      Born between     Born after         Date of birth
                    1863           1863 and 1883   | 1883 and 1903       1903       ine unknown

                                          34                                                  40

 Females                                                  4]              15                  29
                                                          100             33       ac.        69


      Source: Kontenido di Zikinza Curacao 1974



Brenneker and Juliana recorded a large part of Curacaoan folklore, and their data have
been utilized by many scholars, both local and international (see appendix I). They col-
lected several types of songs, categorized them according to how they were named, which
was related to their use in social life (see appendix II). Ben-Amos calls this a cultural-cen-
tral approach and emphasizes that ‘the principles underlying indigenous categorization are
rooted in the cultural thought, language and experience. The differences in names of gen-
res, in classes of verbal behavior, and in their symbolic meaning reflect essential cultural
concepts’ (1977:3).
    For the purpose of this thesis, I wish to distinguish between work songs for men (kan-
tika di trabou di hende homber) and those for women (kantika di trabou di hende muhé).
Both fell under the genre kantika di trabou, indicating the purpose for which they were
sung. The work songs for men included those for construction work, such as the kantika
di piki (work with the pickaxe), the kantika di koba pos (when digging a well), kantika di
dèmpel (when filling holes or canals) and the kantika di mukel (when using a sledgeham-
mer) Other songs included the kantika di kore ficho, which were sung while taking coal to
the shore to be loaded onto boats for transportation. There were also the kantika di rema
ponchi, sung when carrying people on small boats (with flat bottoms) across the harbour.
Fishermen sang their own songs, such as the kantika di bua kanoa (sung when rowing) and
the kantika di hala kanao (when beaching the fishing boat).
    For women there were songs for grinding millet in the ‘metate’” called kantika di
mula maishi. The kantika di bati maishi were sung while rhythmically pounding millet in
the tree-trunk mortar (pilon). There were also songs — the kantika di bati ku tati — to



 56
accompany the pounding of cactus (kadushi) with a mortar called ‘tati.”® Through
cradlesongs and lullabies, kantika pa hasi yu drumi’, mothers interacted with their babies
and children. Women sang while washing clothes, both in a group or individually. The Bren-
neker/ Juliana collection also contains segments of story-telling and ring game activities. In
all of these songs, the melodious pounding provided a percussion rhythm for the singing.
     Besides that, Brenneker and Juliana collected religious songs, such as the kantika di San
Antoni and the kantika di San Wan." And their collection also comprises songs relating to
children, love and satire: the kantika di pleizi or tambú. Through the several kantikanan di
seu a more detailed view is given of the various songs sung when harvesting and storing
the millet in the mangasina — while marching to the rhythm of the drum, cow horn and
piece of cow plough, the agan. In relation to this, both ethnographers collected the sounds
of various musical instruments.
     Brenneker and Juliana collected stories other than solely the Kuenta di Nanzi. The
Kuenta di Luango, for example, were a genre which received more attention from both
ethnographers. Rutgers also writes of an anonymous person who in 1968 describes an
experience he had with someone who knew an old Luango story, ‘Before White and Black
came to Curacao’ (Rutgers 2001). These Luango stories referred to slaves who were reput-
ed to be able to fly back to Africa as long as they had not eaten salt. Those who had,
remained behind and sang about those who had flown away — these stories are known
throughout the Americas. Most Luango stories — kantika makamba, masapaso or makwiba
— were sung, in Guene, and fragments form part of the Zikinzá-collection (Juliana 1988).
     Brenneker and Juliana also conducted research in other areas, such as the names of
plants and fish as well as nicknames and personal matters. They gathered information on
folk beliefs and customs regarding conception, pregnancy, birth and infancy, dating,
courtship and marriage, healing and remedies, ceremonial customs, agriculture, death and
funeral arrangements. They documented their information in print.”
     Their collection also includes a considerable number of artifacts, which also gives us an
idea of people’s lives in the past. Henry Glassie (1983:377) underscored the idea that arti-
facts surviving from times past are a direct encounter with cultural expressions and can
deepen our understanding of a particular historical period. The artifacts collected by Bren-
neker and Juliana have a particular value. By collecting them they were able to rescue com-
monly used utensils from historical oblivion. Since most of these artifacts are clearly work-
ing tools and show utilitarian values, they are also important indicators of the economic
reality of Afro-Curagaoans after emancipation.
     Haviser (1999) identified artifacts that revealed certain customs through excavated
material remains at a kunuku-house on the plantation Knip. For example, during the exca-
vation, coins were found in the walls. This sustains the oral tradition that people when they
built their houses would place coins in the corners of the house for prosperity.



Conclusion

The use of oral sources has proven very important in this study of the Afro-Curagaoan
popular class. A large part of the group under consideration saved and transmitted their


                                                                                           57
knowledge of the past through their oral tradition. This thesis is therefore to a large extent
based on oral sources. However, when utilizing these data for studying the past, some dif-
ficulties need to be looked at. One of these concerns the problems of veracity and repre-
sentativeness. It has thus been necessary to look at certain issues in order to guarantee the
application of these data for this historical study.
     The search for veracity of these data led to their evaluation during different phases. The
first was the interviewing process and related transcription. Next, the quality of the ques-
tions, the registration of silence, intonation and humour during the interviews was very
important. The literal transcriptions gave access to songs, stories and proverbs reproduc-
ing the intensity of an event or issue.
    Cross-checking the data was essential and was done through the use of different types
of documents. One of these were the written records by the colonial government, which
often rendered invisible those with little power, but nevertheless allowed me to periodize
developments after the abolition of slavery. These documents reflected the spirit of that
period and gave the dominant views against which the oral narratives of resistance, accom-
modation, negotiation or any other type of relationships between people of unequal sta-
tus could be placed. The government records regarding matters such as population, mar-
riage and land acquisition provided the necessary background to better understand their
complex nature.
     Folkloric information in print was also used for cross-checking. The dilemma of these
data is that they were documented outside the context of the events and issues. They were
sometimes biased either by self-censorship of those who expressed them or censored by
the collectors themselves. Nevertheless, as the collectors published these data, they provid-
ed information which helped to periodize certain expressions of the people and to give
insight as to when certain folk songs, stories, proverbs and other aspects of daily life were
popular.
     The oral data collected by Brenneker and Juliana also proved very useful, as these
researchers had been able to interview people born just before the abolition of slavery, who
had experienced the transition from a society which knew enslavement to one where
everyone was juridically free. Brenneker and Juliana also interviewed people born soon
after the abolition of slavery.
     The oral data used in this dissertation were selected in accordance with a range of cri-
teria. In the end, these data proved to be indispensable as they sustain, contradict or eluci-
date information derived from written documents or existing literature.



Notes

1    The historian Peter Burke strongly advocates this approach to history, confirming this disposi-
     tion in several of his publications. See for example Burke 1980 and 1991.
2    The role of the older generation in transmitting information is further confirmed in the letter
     dated 30 March 1889 by Ben of Westpunt, a regular writer in the newspaper La Union, who men-
     tioned that the godmother of one of his children, Maria Angelista, used to tell them about the
     1795 slave revolt, which she had witnessed. She died at the age of 108. La Union, 13-5-1889.




58
      Interview Inie Sirvanie (born 1-4-1910), Allen, 27-11-1989 (NatAr).
      Interview Eduardo Tokaai (born 1899), Allen, 12-9-1984 (NatAr).
   Interview Victor Bartolomeo (born 1935), Allen and La Croes, May 2000. Private collection
da
UU
DO
U  It was not unique that Brenneker took an interest in documenting the folk culture. In Paramari-
   bo (Suriname) for instance, Father R.M.E. Abbenhuis collected popular songs and plays, which
   were used by L.C. Panhuys (1932-1933).
   I agree with Uriam (1995:97-8) who explains the distrust among an older generation of anthro-
   pologists regarding the reliability of oral tradition by reference to the unprofessional way this
   source was initially used.
   Carlo Ginzburg (1980) used court records in his exploration of the intellectual and spiritual
   world of a member of the popular class, the Italian miller Domenico Scandella, born in 1532.
   Emmanuel LeRoy Ladurie (1975) is also based on judicial records, through which he tried to
   extract information on the peasants themselves.
   Latour, for example, in his article on priest Vincent Jansen and the construction of the Sint Willi-
   brordus Church, stated that he had talked with many elderly people regarding the contruction
   of the church (1940:12).
10 The term ‘folklore’ was introduced in 1846 by the antiquarian William Thoms. He defined it as
   matters relating to customs, manners, observances, superstitions, ballads and proverbs. In a rap-
   idly changing Europe the study of folklore became part of a process to glorify the common man
   and was aimed at recording customs in danger of disappearing. It was a kind of salvage opera-
   tion principally undertaken by the elite class, who had found in this the remains of their origi-
   nal culture. As a consequence, folklore archives were developed and folklore societies were
   founded throughout Europe (Dundes 1965).
     Sarah Maza also addresses the problems involved in using folklore as a historical source, even
     though she uses the term ‘oral narratives’ instead of ‘folklore.
12   They see this problem as part of a larger issue when dealing with memory, namely the relation-
     ship between memory as an internal representation and memory as an articulated representa-
     tion.
13   Broek (1988) gives an overview of how Nanzi stories changed over time. In many later publica-
     tions several versions of one story were presented. Broek attributes this to their continuation. He
     looked at new versions of old stories and studied the creolization process in these stories by com-
     paring the different versions. See also Broek 1993:15.
     See also van Cappelle 1901. He collected his stories during his field study of exotic animals in
     Nickerie, Suriname. When the people lay in their hammocks, one of them, surrounded by a few
     listeners, would start telling stories. Van Capelle’s interest was stimulated when he was in Para-
     maribo and his travelling companion made phonological recordings of Negro songs.
15   See also Darnton (1984:17), who referred to the period between 1870 and 1914 as ‘the Golden
     Age of folktale research’
16   Broek 1995; Latour 1937-1940. Since 1919 the West-Indische Gids provided an important forum
     for those interested in the colonies. In 1960 the name of the magazine was changed into the
   Nieuwe West-Indische Gids (New West Indian Guide) and had a broader scope.
17 Burke sees this as an important point to take into consideration when reviewing oral informa-
     tion documented by folklorists.
18 The author remained anonymous for some time. It was later revealed to be Abraham Jesurun, a
   member of the Jewish elite (Broek 1995).
19 Kompa Nanzi is the name given to Nanzi (in the Dutch West Indies) or Anansi (in the English-
     speaking Caribbean).
20 La Union, 8-1-1920; see also Amigoe, 28-5-1886: ‘Kuenta di Nanzi Is a Lie’.
21 There is some confusion regarding the Papiamentu name for these story-tellers. Latour refers to
   them as chadó di cuenta, Jesurun as hinchadó di kuenta and the etnonologist Juliana as echadó di
     kuenta.



                                                                                                     59
                                                                                                col-
      Droog (1975) contains the Dutch versions of twelve stories from Geerdink-Jesurun Pinto's
      lection. Finally, Dennert (1967) and Lauffer (1971) also published several Nanzi stories.
      See also Darnton (1984:9-13), who analysed this aspect for the story ‘Little Red Riding Hood’ (Le
      Petit Chaperon Rouge).
      In his introduction Wood states that these stories corresponded with the ones he had collected
      on Curacao and Bonaire in 1967. Regretfully, he did not compare versions and thus did not sig-
      nal where censorship was applied to Geerdink-Jessurun Pinto’s stories.
      Juliana stated that he had collected the stories on audio-tape and that he had tried to transcribe
      them as literally as possible, without adding anything.
      The ocho dia was the highlight of a series of prayers conducted by the working class held during
      eight consecutive nights following a burial. Rutgers (1994:352) mentions a polemic in the news-
      papers in 1905, following a member of the elite class describing an ocho dia, whereby the ques-
      tion was asked as to why a decent person would participate in such a ceremony at all. See also
      John de Pool (1935), who denounces the custom of ocho dia as barbaric, which ‘luckily’ the
      Roman Catholic Church was trying hard to eradicate.
27 Vincent Jansen, a priest in the parish of Willibrordus, Banda Bou, wrote under the name of‘Ipi-
      See Amigoe, 28-5-1884. See also Rutgers 1994:47. Text of the improvised song in the traditional
      call-and-response style.
29    The text is as follows:
      El afoedoewe
      Yo no me welete a foedoewe
      Ma welete,
      Ma welete
      Ma welete
      El a cocodowe
      Dowe ma mi foedoewe
      Da cuacua
      El di dodowe mi el keke
      Ela mi...
30    Di Guaira de vai de vai ta blancoe di Holanda
      di Guaira
      ta kende ta jama de vai?
      Di Guaira
      Tu blancoe mees di Holanda oé
      Di Guaira
      Ta fortuna mees a corre kune
      Di Guaira
      Ta Spanjool mes es canailje aja
      Di Guaira.
Bil   The meaning of ‘Foedoewe’ and ‘Hoenja lamanta para’ is unknown. Latour 1953:32-3.
32    This was probably the musical instrument called the agan: part of an animal-drawn iron plough
      is transformed into a percussion instrument, together with an iron bracelet (barbá) and an iron
      bar (man or manga). The musician hits the bar against the plough while it leans on the iron:
      bracelet, thus producing a loud metallic sound.
38) This was the bastel. See Juliana 1976. The bastel was also called kalbas den tobo (water drum). It
   was a musical instrument made from a container, such as a tub for washing clothes. The tub was
   then filled for three quarters with water in which half a gourd floated. The musician played the
   instrument by striking the gourd with his hands, or with two sticks with a bulb at the end.
34 This was the kachu di baka (cow horn): a musical instrument played by blowing
                                                                                        through the
   removed tip named supla. It was a very important instrument during the harvest feast
                                                                                          called seu.
   It was used to guide the people who cut the maize (sorghum vulgare) and, later
                                                                                    on in the day, to
   accompany the tambu and again while people marched (wapa) to the storage house.


60
55) La Cruz, 17-12-1902. See also Panhuys (1932-1933:124) who received a song from C. Statius
   Muller, an old finance administrator, who heard it from one of the workers ona plantation where
   he used to stay. The worker called it ‘kanta makamba’ and would sing it while churning butter.
   Statius Muller could not decipher the song and noted it phonologically:
   Zien zien, sabana phrizien, aiko
   Pero pero mi kopra
   Sabanco mi coquin
   Eende soemachie, tsjali, pan
   Kakienja, joko pra pra pra.
36 La Union, 2-5-1890.
Sy Johannes Paulus Delgeur was born in Rotterdam on 24-10-1869 and wrote under the pseudo-
   nym of ‘Jan Paul. On 18-7-1897 he arrived as a missionary on Curacao. He was a priest in St.
     Willibrordus, St. Eustatius, Barber and St. Martin and died in Curacao on 24-5-1931.
38   Panhuys (1933-1934a:16) mentioned a first volume of trancriptions of Surinamese songs and a
     survey of a collection of data on popular songs and plays of Suriname. The songs were collected
     by brother R.M. Abbenhuis in Paramaribo, who was assisted by J.P.J. Berkenveld, the Surinamese
   head of a missionary school who knew the traditions of slave and plantation folklore from child-
   hood.
39 Of all folk customs the tambu was the most persecuted. During slavery it was feared by the slave-
   owners, as it offered the opportunity for the enslaved to gather and express disgust at their situ-
   ation. The songs and dances were heavily condemned by the clergy, who saw them as lascivious
   and sexually immoral. Also following emancipation the tambú would continue to be heavily
   condemned by both the government and clergy. Members of the older generation recount the
   severe forms of punishment exercised by the clergy, including the confiscation of drums, whip-
   ping and even expulsion of the participants from the Catholic Church.
40 Most of these songs reappeared in La Union in September 1940 and in the Amigoe in May 1943.
   They also appeared in van Meeteren (1947), where they were referred to as Curagaoan folk songs.
4] Cohen Henriquez and Hesseling 1935:168. For example ‘Lo ke ta den barika di tiger, no ta den
   montado’ (What is in the stomach ofthe tiger is not in the stomach of the hunter) was compared
     with the Sranan version: ‘Keeskeesi take: di sabi disi de na hem bele, da vo hem: ma disi na sei
     hem mofo, da vo hontiman’ (The monkey says: what is in his belly is for him, but what is in my
     cheeks is for the hunter). Meaning: what is eaten cannot be taken away, but what is saved can.
42   They also concluded that a large number of Papiamentu proverbs originated in the West Indies
     or were remnants from an African past. In this respect the authors differed from other collectors,
     who did not refer to the African origin of some proverbs, but usually examined them in relation
     to either Dutch or Spanish proverbs or even biblical ones.
43   ‘Tekum’ refers to the sound made when drinking water.
44   In most cases adults use proverbs when talking to children; the reverse is unusual. The youth has
     less need or desire to use proverbs, which are associated not only with antiquity but also with the
     wisdom of maturity which traditionally comes through experience.
45   The king is called shon Arei.
46   Hendrikse-Rigaud (1994:205) explains that the proverb is also used on its own in the form
     ‘Banana a muri, vipe tei’ (The banana tree is dead, but the sprout remains), meaning that on the
     death of the head of the family his sibling replaces him.
47   Benito Albino (date of birth and date of interview not registered; Zikinzá-collection, T 185,
     NatAr).
48 Dalia is the name formerly given to a male lover.
49 In the Netherlands, ‘volkskunde’, in contrast to ‘volkenkunde’ is aimed at the study of the popu-
     lar class within different European societies. It is used to denote matters which the folklorist W.
   Thoms (1846) called ‘folklore’.
50 La Cruz, 10-12-1947, ‘Saber popular di Corsou pa Sr. N. van Meeteren’.



                                                                                                      61
     The barí of Bonaire, similar to the tambú on Curagao, implied dancing and singing at social
     occasions, whereby the drum predominated.
     Latour gave a positive review of van Meeteren’s book (La Cruz, 10-12-1947).
     Brenneker (1962:1): ‘The missionary must adapt his method to the authentic psyche and culture
     of a people. Thus he must have knowledge of the culture.’
     Already in 1930 the United States government commissioned the collection of narratives from
     former slaves through the Work Projects Administration (WPA).
     Juliana had been socialized within oral culture as a youngster: during his youth he had grown
     accustomed to story-telling in narratives and in songs. This was one of the main reasons for his
     interest. Amigoe, 6 -2-1971.
     See Brenneker 1969-1975; tapes Juliana/Brenneker collection stored at the Public Library.
     Amigoe, 6-2-1971.
     Of these 267 informants, 115 were female and 152 male. Some informants sang more than one
     song. The eldest was born around 1853: ten years before emancipation. The lyrics are available
     in books entitled Lekete Minawa, Benta and Sambumbu — a series on Curacaoan and Bonarian
   folk customs. The Sambumbu also contain other lyrics collected by Brenneker and Juliana, which
   are not stored in the Zikinzá-collection.A number of interviews are also stored in the Public
   Library in Willemstad. The corpus of this archive consists of 110 tapes containing information
   on all aspects of life.
59 A grinder made of coral stone. For a long period millet was the staple food for the black work-
   ing class.
60 ‘Kadushi’ is a type of cactus (Cereus rebandus). ‘Tati’ is a mortar, small in size, in which the cac-
   tus is squashed into a slimy substance and cooked with, for example, dry salted fish in a sauce. It
   is eaten with corn meal called funchi.
61 Up until the present these songs for San Antonio are expressed on the 13th of June during gath-
   erings in which particularly women show their devotion to the saint. Women petition the saint
   for certain favours, such as good health for their families and themselves.
62 Some examples are Brenneker 1958, 1959 and 1969-1975; Juliana 1969, 1976, 1977b and 1978.
     He also used the magazine Kristof as a local forum for disseminating this information. See Juliana
     1975a, 1975b, 1980a, 1980b, 1983a and 1983b.




62
CHAPTER III
Afro-Curacaoan Life and
Culture Prior to Emancipation



Introduction

 When studying the historiography of the popular class, scholars are confronted with the
 problem of categorization. Peter Burke, for example, addresses this dilemma in his histo-
 rical studies on the popular class in Europe (1978, 1991). Usually the ‘two-model system’
 of dividing the masses from the elite is applied, but here the problem lies in determining a
 criterion for exact division. In which manner does a small group, generally called ‘the elite’,
 excel in one way or another with respect to the majority of the population? In his study on
 mentality and culture in pre-industrial Europe (1988), the historian Petrus Spierenburg
 recognizes the inherent difficulties in distinguishing between the elite and the non-elite.
 An additional factor is that there are large differences in values, beliefs and behaviour pat-
 terns among the members of the popular class themselves (Sharpe 1991:27).
     The situation in the Caribbean is even more complex. Here, class divisions have over
 time become closely connected to racial, ethnic and colour differences. The formation of
 these societies was grounded on European colonization, essentially the decimation of the
 indigenous population and the forced importation of diverse ethnic groups. Today’s
 African presence in the Caribbean is due to three hundred years of transatlantic slave
 trade. The enslaved and their descendants would remain in the lowest strata of society.
 They responded to this system of racially based social inequality in many diverse ways.
     Although this study does not deal with slavery as such, social life following emancipation
cannot be studied in isolation (Olwig 1993:6). Necessarily, the lives of these enslaved Africans
revolved around labour; it was the hub around which they formed their social lives. Ira Berlin
and Philip Morgan state that ‘when, where and especially how the enslaved worked deter-
mined, in large measure, the course of their lives’ (1993:1). This forced labour as the central
focus of life has been studied extensively. These studies reveal the diversity of work carried
out by enslaved people in the Americas - leading to different gradations in the slave/master
relationships. For example, mining was more demanding than agricultural work, which in
turn was heavier than working in the factories and shops. Housework was physically the least
demanding. Within these broad categories there were many differences, for example depend-
ing on the type of crop to be cultivated. It is generally accepted that work on the sugar plan-
tations was by far the hardest to endure, as the working year of these enslaved people was
longer - more hours per day, more days per month - than that of those engaged in the culti-
vation of any other crop (Berlin and Morgan 1993:4; Thornton 1998:162).



                                                                                             63
Apart from the actual work, the different plantation regimes were a determining factor in
the social life and culture of the enslaved people, according to Mintz and Price (1992).
Most slavery studies have dealt with life on plantations producing monocrop commodities
for Europe (Beckles and Shepherd 2000:253; Shepherd, 2002). Less attention has been paid
to developments on plantations based on a subsistence economy, like most of those on
Curacao. Here the ecology of the area, with its infertile soil and lack of rain, led to the exis-
tence of small plantations combining varied activities, such as subsistence farming, horti-
culture, animal husbandry (focusing on pigs and goats), hunting, fishing and the collec-
tion of natural products for export       (Hamelberg     [1901-1903]1979:82)What         are the
consequences for the daily life experiences of the enslaved and the freed?
    In this Chapter I will outline Afro-Curagaoan cultural history from the time Africans
were imported into Curacao as enslaved people until the moment slavery was abolished
entirely in 1863. I will identify the group, in this study referred to as ‘Afro-Curagaoans’ and
try to answer the question as to how they were able to conduct their social life within and
beyond the different constraints in the period of slavery. Studying the ensuing social struc-
ture will help to provide insight into the many ways in which the enslaved established and
developed their own institutions and cultures within and beyond the confines set for them
by those in power. I will also look at the cultural meanings and values they managed to cre-
ate within the boundaries of this particular social system.



The Arrival of Blacks on Curacao
It is probable that during the Spanish occupation of Curacao (1499-1634), there were
already blacks residing on the island, since they also formed part of the Spanish force
exploring the Americas. Nevertheless, the arrival of large groups of Africans is linked to the
introduction of slavery. It is not possible to state precisely when the first Africans arrived
after the Dutch colonization of Curacao in 1634. One of the earliest records in which they
appear as a social group are the instructions of the West Indian Company (W.I.C.) to Jacob
Pietas Tolck, director of the island from 1638 until 1641’. In these, guidelines were given
as to how the enslaved people should be dealt with.
     As the Dutch became heavily engaged in the slave trade, Africans by definition came to
be perceived as economic commodities. Between 1644 and 1717 the island turned into a
commercial slave depot. On the basis of the Asiento Contract with Spain, the W.LC. would
sell enslaved people to surrounding Spanish colonies (Kunst 1981:125). Settlers in the New
Netherlands would also purchase enslaved people from Curacao, since they were preferred
to those coming directly from Africa, who often were ill on arrival due to the extremely
poor conditions on board. In the Curagaoan depots at Zuurzak and Karké they were
allowed to recuperate in expectation of further transportation (Thornton 1998:159; Mar-
tinus 1997:125).
    Even though few data are available on the number of enslaved people in transit, or the
number actually remaining on the island, one can assume that when Curagaoan society
functioned as a transit harbour for enslaved people, little slave labour was required on the
island itself. The few indicators of the number of enslaved people present on the island


64
during certain periods underscore this assumption. For example, in 1668 the Chamber of
Amsterdam saw to the importion of food for the 3,000 enslaved people on the island
(Hoetink 1958:68). From 1667 until 1675, the peak period of exportation, around 24,000
African enslaved people were shipped to Curacao (Jordaan 1999:474). Another source
shows that in 1683 a contract was signed by the Asientista Juan Barosso del Posso for the
delivery of 18,000 enslaved people over a period of six years (Hamelberg [1901-
 1903]1979:74; Hoetink 1958:68). These numbers exceed by far the 576 enslaved people
who worked for the W.I.C. around 1695 and the 1841 enslaved people registered as house-
and craft-enslaved people in 1697 (Hamelberg [1901-1903]1979:83; Hoetink 1958:68).
Furthermore, the number of enslaved settling on the island would fluctuate, as they were
sold by the W.I.C. when faced with economic adversity (Hoetink 1958:68).
     From these data it is clear that most enslaved people were merchandise in transit.
Those remaining would fulfil the labour needs on the plantations of the W.LC. These were
essentially centres for food production for both resident enslaved people and those in tran-
sit, as well as for the crews of commercial shipping. The enslaved people worked the land:
they sowed, weeded, harvested and reaped millet - the staple crop. Other tasks entailed the
cleaning and maintenance of wells, animal husbandry and the burning of chalk to make
lime for masonry work.’
     The ratio of male to female enslaved people in the seventeenth century remains
unclear. Initially (when Curacao began functioning as a centre for slave transport) male
slaves must have outnumbered the female slaves on the island, as the masters in the Amer-
icas generally preferred - young - men, whom they believed to be strong and efficient
workers (Berlin and Morgan 1993:12; Moreno Fraginals 1978:19; Thornton 1998:173).
     With the ending of the Spanish Succession War in 1714, the importance of the island
as a depot began to decrease. This contributed to the breakdown of the W.I.C’s previous
monopoly on the slave trade with Africa. The trade would continue as a private enterprise
from the 1730s. Slave prices collapsed. In 1715, an artisan slave was worth 150 to 160 pesos,
while in former years the same person cost about 500 to 600 pesos. The W.I.C. was unable
to sell many of its enslaved Africans due to reduced demand (Rutten 1992:183). This, com-
bined with other problems - such as rivalries between the white civil servants and the mer-
chants, and severe drought - would affect the social situation of the depot slaves and of
those working for the W.LC. still further. For example, between 1714 and 1720, the food
supply from the company diminished. This would eventually push the enslaved into a
rebellion in 1716 (Rutten 1992:182). Faced with these difficulties the W.I.C. began to rent
plantations out to private people in 1717.
    The year 1778 saw the last slave ship entering the Curagaoan harbour with new slaves
(Hoetink 1958:70). Soon, African-born slaves were now outnumbered by the creole-born
group. By the end of the eighteenth century most plantations and enslaved people were
privately owned (Renkema 1981a:7). This, however, did not result in the authorities relin-
quishing control over these slaves; they would continue to impose rules as and when it
suited their interests.




                                                                                          65
The dynamics of Curagaoan society are more clearly revealed as of the late eighteenth cen-
tury, with improved population statistics on the island available. Data in the nineteenth
century, being relatively more reliable than those of former centuries, give an overview of
the black population on the island. Even then, Renkema cautions, one has to be careful
with these statistics as the registration was not always carried out correctly. Slave-owners
often underreported enslaved people in their possession, to evade head taxes (Renkema
1981a:117-8). Until 1840 the Afro-Curacaoan population is classified as ‘Enslaved and
Freedpeople’ (see Table 3.1).

     Table 3.1 Estimated Population of Curacao, 1820, 1830, 1840


                    Total                                 Freed
     Year        population            Whites    %     manumitted            %    Enslaved       %
     1820          14,733               1595)    zE        5,195             3     6,983     eal dede
     1830          14,511               2,682    18        Sel      ms 40          5,908         40
| 1840             14,916               DD OY:   18        6,432             43    5,750         38


     Source: Renkema 1981a:336



After 1840 the manumitted former slaves were registered together with the white popula-
tion as residents (Table 3.2). The number of enslaved people decreased over the years.
Their number in the Table varies from the total of slaves really present on the island. In
1863 according to the Koloniale Verslagen (Colonial Reports), there were about 5,498
enslaved people on the island, whereas the slave registers of that year report a total of
6,751, with 6,684 of these belonging to private owners and 67 to the government. This is
1,253 slaves more than the number reported in the Colonial Report, from which the fig-
ures in Table 3.2 are sourced (Renkema 1981a:118). After due corrections, the total num-
ber of enslaved people who received their freedom in 1863 would be 35 per cent of the total
population and not 29 per cent as is stated in the Table.

     Table 3.2 Estimated Population of Curacao, 1841, 1850, 1860, 1863


                    Total          =                               ai
     Year        population            Ea        %      Enslaved         %
  1841              15,544       fl geiser                6,026       39
  1850              16,530          10,892 [66            5,638       34
| 1860              19,596          13,634   aad          5,962       30_|
| 1863              19,127          13,629 | 71 jm        Sj       ai 29.|
     Source: Renkema 1981a:336-7




66
There was a clear gender bias in the geographic spread of the Afro-Curacaon slave popu-
lation. The following Table drawn up by Renkema demonstrates that there were more male
slaves in the countryside than female slaves. Plantation owners often sent some of their
female slaves to work in their homes in town or in those of a third person (Rutten
 1989:33).


    Table 3.3 Geographical Distribution of the Enslaved Population of Curacao According to Gender



                   Countryside (western and eastern)                        Town District

    Year          Male          Female     Boy      Girl        Male | Female il Boy          Girl
    1820          1847           1190      980       835        281        918        438      494
    1830          1470     ie 1017         819       827        216        765        35D      439
             Ie                                                       an
5 1840            1277               998   785       745        206        72M        479      460

    1848     |    1170 ede           904   742   jn 664    is   183        749        428     449

    1856          Mis                905   811       729        210   } su            416     459


    Source: Renkema      1981a:122




African Continuities and Creolization
In order to understand the dynamics of the formation of Afro-Curagaoan culture, many
issues need to be addressed - to begin with, the enslaved peoples’ African background. This
has been a topic of much debate, especially for those in search of African continuities on
the island. Since in most cases slave-owners would merely identify their enslaved people’s
origins by the name of the embarkation port rather than by their ethnic background, this
has considerably hindered research.*
    Another aspect to take into account when looking at origin is that preferences for
enslaved people from specific regions would shift over time (Engerman and Genovese
1974:33-49). For example, in 1668 the W.I.C. expressed its dislike for slaves from the areas
of River Calabary and Rio Camoronis, who were said to be prone to commit suicide, while
thirty years later the company preferred slaves from precisely those areas Knappert
1932:82; Hartog 1961:447).
    Postma (1990:106), in his extensive study on African exportations and the origins of
enslaved people, mentions different reasons why traders would decide to acquire enslaved
people in certain parts of Africa. These were availability, prices, commercial contacts with
African leaders, political and economic conditions in a given region, and the demands of
the marketplace. It has been established, then, that at the beginning of the eighteenth cen-
tury, most enslaved Africans destined for Curacao came from the Gold Coast (now
Ghana), Elmina, Fida, Ardra, Accra, Bercou, Angola and Luango (the region north of the
mouth of the Congoriver (Jordaan 1999:475; Romer 1979:13). As Hoetink (1958:69-70)
cautioned, we need to bear in mind that not necessarily all enslaved people came from


                                                                                                     67
these areas, as they were also caught in the African interior. Berlin and Morgan (1993:13)
support this argument and state that slave-owners had little control over the African mar-
ket; enslaved people were drawn from the interior of Africa to coastal points, from where
they would be distributed.
    In 1755 the Catholic priest Gambier recorded in a book on baptism the Christian
names of enslaved people along with their places of origin, thus giving a possible indica-
tion of the diversity in geographical origins of enslaved people on the island and a variety
of ethnic backgrounds as well (Hoetink, 1958:71). Gambier registered place-names such as
Timbo, Dombo, Congo, Canga, Jamba, Biciba, Luango, Socco, Angora, Amina, Laviras,
Carrabarri, Macamba, Marcambe, Guene, Bobo and Watje (Hoetink, 1958:71). Hoetink
(1958:71) linked a few of these to specific ethnic groups in West and Central Africa.
Although this apparent heterogeneity must have had implications for the cultural rebuild-
ing in Curacaoan society, it should be noted that at the time cultural similarities existed
between   Central and West Africa - even between West and East Africa (Thornton
1998:183-205).
    The question as to why certain enslaved people were kept on the island while others
were transported, is a difficult one to answer due to the lack of available historical sources
(Hoetink 1958:69). Jordaan shows that certain slaves remained in order to assist with the
disembarkation of the newcomers. In the beginning of the eighteenth century the W.I.C.
used seasoned Luango’s as caretakers of the newly arrived enslaved people (Jordaan
1999:478-9). Language skills were probably the primary reason for this, as these assistant
slaves were able to communicate with both the new arrivals and the slave-traffickers.
    Linguistic creolization was therefore in full swing even if documents show that in the
period around 1750 some enslaved Africans still used their native languages. Papiamentu
increasingly became the lingua franca both among slaves, between masters and slaves and
even within the master class. Written evidence shows that Papiamentu already existed in
the eighteenth century and was used as a form of communication among members of the
Jewish group on the island (Salomon 1982:368).°
    The various cultural expressions originating from many corners of Africa - having sur-
vived in diverse expressions, songs, stories and place-names on Curacao - bear witness to
these diverse backgrounds. For instance, Papiamentu terms such as ‘“Luango) ‘Bobo’ and
‘Guene’ - originally referring to particular ethnic groups - are still in use. Earlier studies
have erroneously concluded that on Curacao ‘Luango’ and ‘Guene’ only have negative
meanings      (van Meeteren   1947;   Hoetink   1958:69-70).   According   to van   Meeteren
(1947:233) people from these areas were considered foolish as they spoke a language
incomprehensible to others. Yet, as we saw, in the beginning of the eighteenth century the
W.I.C. used experienced Luango’s as caretakers of the newly arrived slaves (Jordaan
1999:479).°
    Indeed, some Papiamentu sayings and proverbs still use the term ‘Luango in a negative
sense, for example ‘Pufid pa luangu, bakoba pa makakw (A cut for the Luango, is a banana
for the monkey), referring to people who allow others to make a fool of them (Hendrikse-
Rigaud 1994:293). The priest Putman, for example, stated in a letter to his parents, dated
14 March 1838, that he had heard ‘two negroes quarreling, while one of them said: ‘Bestia
quico bo ta carda [corda?], fer [for?] di unda bo a vini ladron, Luango!” (Animal, what
                                                                                        do


68
you remember(?), where do you come from, Luango thief?). The other answered angrily:
‘Si bo no ta tapa bo boca un bez, lo mi dal bo un bostaa [bofta?], ku bo ta weita culu [kul?]
pa un pompoena’ (If you don’t close your mouth immediately, I will give you a punch, that
you will see backside for a pumpkin).
     But there are more meanings: in stories the Luango’s - and the Guene’s - were portrayed
as a supernatural people. As previously stated, they were believed to be small people with
wings who were ably to fly back to Africa if they did not eat salt. The ability would be lost
once salt was consumed. This theme can be found in the music and oral literature of the
Caribbean and the southern United States. In the Caribbean the myth came to imply free-
dom - either in the sense of escaping from the plantation or as the ultimate act of suicide
(McDaniel 1990:29, 38).
     Due to their supposed ability to fly, the Luango’s and Guene’s enjoyed a certain pres-
tige; one of my informants referred to them as ‘sabi di e tempunan ayá’ - the wise people
of those days. The following quotation comes from a man born in 1898; this information
had been passed on to him by his elders.

R.A.: Di kon a yama nan ‘Luangu’?                   R.A.: Why were they called Luango’s?
C.E.: Pasó nan no tabata hende djaki. Nan a         C.E.: Because they were not people from here.
bini di un parti di Afrika. E tempunan ayá, e       They came from a part ofAfrica. At the time,
shonnan tabata bai kumpra hende pa traha pa         the shons (the slavers) would go and buy people
nan. E luangunan tabata bula bai bini. M’a          there to work for them. The Luango’s used to fly
krese tende esei i mi a tende ku e shonnan          back and forth. I grew up and heard that they
tabatin hopi trabou ku nan paso nan tabatin         (the shons)    had   great   trouble   with   them
ala. Nan   tabata bula bai bini, bula bai bint,     because they had wings (emphasis on wings).
bula bai bini, te un biaha nan a bula bai sin       They flew back and forth, back and forth, back
bini bèk. Si, ta asina ami a lanta tende. Asina     and forth, until they flew away, never to come
ami a lanta tende ora mi tabata krese.’             back again. Yes, that is the way I heard it. That
                                                    is the way I heard it when I was growing up.

The informant clearly focuses on this ability to fly, which represented freedom and independ-
ence, and thus contrasted with the constraints of enslavement. Similar powers were attributed
to the Guene’s:

C.E.: M’a lanta konosé un sefiora ku tabata         C.E.: I grew up and knew a lady who used to
biba na Montafia. E tabata kabes di e labade-       live in Montana. She was the head of the wash-
ranan di Newport. E tabata yu di un guent. Su       er women in Newport. She was the child of a
tata tabata un gueni. E tabata un muhé chikitu      Guene. Her father was a Guene. She was a
asina. Ami a tende ku e gueninan tin ala, pero      small lady. I heard that the Guene’s had wings,
esaki no tabatin ala. Tur esnan ku tin ala a bula   but this lady did not have any. All those who
bai. El a ked’atras i el a traha na Santa Bár-      had wings flew away. She stayed and worked in
bara. El a ked’atras, pasó el a kome salu. P'eset   Santa Barbara. She stayed back because she had
el a ked’atras.”                                    eaten salt. That is why she stayed back.


The informant made a distinction between the Guene, who had not been born on the
island, as opposed to those who had been born on the island.



                                                                                                    69
The term ‘Guene’ also refers to a language, as the following quotation indicates. The
informant sang several songs in Guene - taught to him by his elders - called the kantika di
guene or kantika di makamba. The notion of origin is not only present in the generic name
given to these songs, which were mostly sung during work", the informant also addressed
his ancestry and the legacy of his family, while he defined the Guene in relation to his race.

E lenga, nos ta bisa, nos tawela ta bisa, nos tata The language, we say, our grandfather, our
ta bisa ta lenga di gueni. Wèl niun di nos no _father, say, is the Guene language. Well, none of
konosé e hendenan ku a papia e lenga ei. Nosa _ us here know those people who spoke the lan-
tende solamente ku nan tabata biba den e guage. We only heard that they lived in this
mundu aki promé ku nos a bin biba aki. Nos ta      world before we lived here. We belong to their
nan rasa. Ta esei hendenan a konta nos.            race. That is what people have told us. There
Tabatin algun di nan ku por a bula. Esun kua _ were some of them who could fly. Those who
kome salu no por a bula bai. Esnan ku a kome _ had eaten salt could not fly away. The ones who
salu, a ked’atras. Nos ta nan rasa. Esei mi        ate salt stayed back. We belong to their race.
tawela a bisami. Awor aki nos ta kanta e kan-      Our grandfather told us. We now sing songs in
tikanan na gueni, pero e tempunan ei, nan no _ Guene, but at the time, they did not only sing
tabata kanta e kantikanan so, nan tabata papia     them, they spoke Guene the way we speak
gueni manera nos ta papia papiamentu awor.*        Papiamentu now.


Another example is given by the singer Shon Tin (born in 1886) from Ma Louisa (eastern
part of Curagao). He told Brenneker that an enslaved man bid farewell to his friends and
then sang the following song as he rose from the ground and flew away:

Le mai mundu eh leba ho                          Lam in trouble’
Le mai mundu eh leba ho                          I am in trouble, man
Le mat mundu eh leba ho                          I am in trouble
Limania go eh saino                              Ifyou see God
Limania go eh mira pa bo numa                    Give my compliments to him
Ma limania go eh saino”                          Ifyou see God

It is evident that the terms ‘Luango’ and “Guene’ have multiple meanings in Curacaoan
society, which have not been sufficiently recognized in past studies.
    Further references to Africa are present in traditional songs, many of which are stored
in the previously mentioned Zikinzá-collection.” A fragment of one such song about
Africa, which was introduced by the singer Reini Laker, 72 years in 1959, from Seru Fortu-
na (centre of Curacao), reads as follows:

Zaba ta keje keje zaba tu nama we                Zaba ta keje keje zaba tu nama we!
Shon Grandi na Ulanda                            The big master in Holland
Su nabiu ta na Gene                              His ship in at Guinea
Zaba tu keje keje zaba tu nama we                Zaba tu keje keje zaba tu nama we
Shon Grandi na Ulanda                            The big master in Holland
Su nabiu ta na Ginewa                            His ship in Guinea
Shon Grandi na Ulanda                            The big master in Holland
Su nabiu el a bai ku kanao'®                     His ship, he went by canoe"



70
In his study on Guene, Frank Martinus analysed a variant of this song sung by another per-
son (age unknown), who stated that Guenewa stands for Africa.” To substantiate this
argument Martinus quotes Norman Cameron (1934), who had found that Northern Melli
was called Guinea at the time - afterwards it became French Guinea and since its inde-
pendence in 1958 it is again known as Guinea (Martinus 1996:200).2°
    Finally, several place-names which have remained in use on the island also have African
origins: ‘Popo’ (a piece of land in the eastern part)”, ‘Kongo’ (also in the eastern part)”,
‘Kanga’ (in the centre), ‘Poz Luango’ (in Willibrordus), ‘Serká Luango’ (in the western part)
‘Calabari’ (near Santa Maria)”, ‘Africa’ (the burial-ground for the enslaved on the planta-
tion of San Juan), and the ‘Seru di Mandinga’ (a hill in the eastern part of the island)
(Brenneker 1969:23). Oral tradition has it that an escaped slave of phenomenal strength
used one of the caves of the Seru di Mandinga as a hiding place. To survive he tended a gar-
den and regularly killed animals of the slave-owners in the neighbourhood. He was never
captured.



Slave Labour as the Hub ofLife
 As the island’s position as a slave depot began to decline in the beginning of the eighteenth
 century, a large number of private people began taking up ownership of plantations and
 enslaved people. Especially in the beginning of Dutch colonization some had made
 attempts to introduce cash crops for export - such as sugar-cane, cotton and indigo, as in
 the rest of the Caribbean - but since this generally proved unsuccessful they would usual-
 ly grow subsistence crops, the primary one being millet (Renkema 1981a:7, 18). The few
 masters growing cash crops owned the largest plantations, some of which housed over one
 hundred enslaved. But generally Curagaoan plantations were small, with the average slave-
 master owning less than five slaves.*
      Labour was a determining factor in the life of enslaved people. The annual cycle of the
 field work - planting, hoeing, tending the crops and harvesting - structured many aspects
 of plantation life: the cycle of work began following the rainy season in October, when the
millet was planted. Then the plot was hoed and protected against insects, pests, weeds; and
close to harvesting also against birds, which could spoil an entire crop. In March or April
the millet would be harvested; the celebration of this event would include the entire plan-
tation’s population, while enslaved people from neighbouring plantations would also par-
ticipate. Both masters and slaves were familiar with this type of festivity.
     West Africans, the majority among the enslaved Africans, used to be farmers and knew
harvest celebrations such as the yams (a major West-African crop) festival, in honour of
the god of fertility (Rattray 1923). The folklorist Roger Abrahams (1992:xxii) describes a
similar phenomenon on plantations in the deep south of the United States. He sees this
type of event as ‘part of a process going on at the plantation in which the enslaved neither
divested themselves of their African cultural heritage nor acculturated to the behaviors and
performance patterns of their masters. To the enslaved people the harvesting of the millet
signalled the end of the agricultural cycle, after which they would be employed in other
types of work, such as tending the animals; most plantations kept cattle, pigs and goats.


                                                                                           71
The common labour division being field-, house- and craft-slaves - implied a certain hier-
archy. For example, artisans were highly valued and they were the ones with better chances
to acquire the means to buy their freedom. But this diversification did not apply to the
smaller plantations, where all may have been put to work in the fields (Renkema
1981a:126). At the same time enslaved people also worked in non-agricultural environ-
ments. When there was no work at the plantation they would, for example, be hired out to
work in town or for the government. In this way, in 1766 the owner of plantation Porto
Mari, Helena Lesire-Kinnegem, received 5.383 pesos for masonry work undertaken by a
few of her enslaved people who helped build the Fort Church.”
    During the first half of the nineteenth century the number of plantations containing
salt-pans increased considerably. In the dry season the enslaved people would be put to
work on the salt-pans, while during the rainy season they worked the millet fields. Salt was
exported to Spanish colonies and to the United States (van Soest 1977:34). This type of
work was arduous. The combination of sun and working with bare feet in the salt water
was referred to as buamentu di salu, hard and unhealthy labour. In 1857 these slaves even
received 25 cents per week for food, thus also showing the beginnings of a wage economy.”
    Such hardships survived in oral traditions. In 1989 I interviewed Clemens Bonifacio,
who at the time was 82 years old. He related certain aspects of working on the salt-pans at
the beginning of the twentieth century:

Nos ta lanta tres or di mardugá. Mas trempan,        We would wake up at three in the morning. The
asina bo por hasi uso di e airu fresku. Och’or di    earlier the better, so you could benefit from the
mainta nos ta stop di traha i nos ta regresá         fresh air. At eight in the morning we stopped
kuat’or di atardi. Ora tin luna yen nos ta traha     working and returned atfour in the afternoon.
te diesun or di anochi. Den sukú ta difisil traha.   If there was a full moon we would work until
Tabatin hende ku ta koba salu ku piki. Nos ta        eleven o'clock in the evening. In the dark it is
yena makutu ku salu. Bo no por yena e maku-          difficult to work. There were people who dug
tunan yen yen paso bo mester laga e awa sali.        salt with a pickaxe. We would then fill the bas-
Despues nos ta pone salu na monton.”                  kets with salt. The baskets should not be filled
                                                      completely as you had to leave the water to
                                                      drain. Then the salt was placed on piles.

Enslaved people would also work as carriers in towns or in shipyards. This diversity in
occupations is clearly shown in a list of slaves escaping from the island made in 1775.
Cooks, bakers, fishermen and sailors are registered (Klooster 1999:506), but also occu-
pations such as violinists and drummers serving the recreational needs of their own-
ers.
    In times of economic adversity, male enslaved people would often be hired out to work
as seamen in order to provide an income for their owners, although this was not entirely
without risk to their owners - 16.6 per cent of runaway enslaved people were sailors.”* This
pattern, labelled by Neville Hall (1985) as maritime maroonage, has been a common thread
running throughout the Caribbean; on Curacao the enslaved would often escape as soon
as the ship reached a port.” Those who returned to the island would have done so due to
family ties (Price 1966:1371). They may have been exposed to other slave cultures in the
Caribbean where, for example, the import of new enslaved people from different areas of


u)
Africa continued well into the nineteenth century. These maritime Maroons may therefore
have stimulated cross-overs in African identity-building in the Atlantic.
    The nature and intensity of female participation in slave-work was determined by the
economic viability and size of the plantation. Women generally worked the land in the
same way men did, and both sexes fell under the generic name of ‘chap [hoe] negroes’
These workers planted, tended and harvested the millet at the appropriate times of year
(Renkema 1981a:115-6). Older female slaves looked after the poultry. Women were also
hired out as domestic servants in town. On the larger plantations, slave women would also
work as seamstresses, washerwomen, ironers, makers of straw hats or as midwives.



Social Life under Slavery
Curagaoan slave society did not simply consist of white masters on the one hand and black
enslaved people on the other. There were different forms of classification, linked to both
class and race. Levels of status seem to have continued within the slave community. Ini-
tially, within the group of enslaved people, diversification was made according to the
length of time a slave had lived on the island - as illustrated by the proverb ‘Es ku bo wela
luangu a sifabo awe, di mi krioyo a sifiami ayera kaba (literally: What your grandmother
Luango taught you today, my Criollo grandma taught me yesterday). Even though both
persons referred to are criollos, as both were born on the island, the one whose parents were
also born on the island (and in this case even grandparents), felt superior to the one whose
parents and/or grandparents came directly from Africa - newly arrived slaves were referred
to as bozals and were at the bottom of this hierarchical scale.
    Indeed, as Jordaan (1999:479) has stated, the nature and length of residence on the
island enhanced one’s position. This corresponds with the general sense of superiority of
creole enslaved people in the Americas, which was attributed to their familiarity with the
condition of enslavement.” These slaves were delegated positions of authority and
laboured independently, while the ones born in Africa - the so-called ‘saltwater slaves’ - had
to perform the meanest tasks, and solely under supervision (Berlin and Morgan 1993:11).
In contrast, the creoles were accredited because of their language skills and their familiar-
ity with the landscape and work. In addition, they supervised the newly arrived. The Papi-
amentu saying ‘Si bo forsa buza, buza ta papia latin’ (If you force the bozal [Africa-born
slave] he will even speak Latin) underscores the idea that bozales could be forced to learn
and do many new things.
    With the increase of coloured people, one’s skin colour became the deciding factor for
social mobility.” Legal discrimination was introduced. Hair texture and the degree of one’s
skin pigmentation became important markers of identity. In general, colour, as in the rest
of the Caribbean, was rated in descending order as follows: whites, quadroon, mesties,
koesties, mulato, sambo and blacks (Teenstra 1977:167; van Dissel 1857:111-112). These
terms were like a summary of a combination of qualities, which to some degree were prob-
ably internalized by the Afro-Curagaoans themselves. Those of mixed race (both enslaved
and freedpeople) were also categorized as ‘coloured’. The term ‘coloured people, hende di
kolo, meant that one had a lighter and therefore more ‘appropriate’ skin colour, thus with


                                                                                           JS)
slightly better chances for upward mobility. Afro-Curacaoan women especially could reach
certain positions on account of their lighter complexion. They were more likely to be chos-
en to work within the household of the enslaved people’s owner; they would work, for
example, as yaya’s (nannies) and as domestic servants (Römer-Kenepa 1980).
    Attitude towards colour remained ambiguous. Sexual intercourse with black women
was generally believed to have curative effects on certain diseases. ‘Pretu ta kura (Black
cures) used to be a common expression. Furthermore, white mothers who were unwilling
or unable to breastfeed their children, would choose a black woman to give milk instead
(Brenneker 1970:10). In the same vein black animals were believed to have special quali-
ties: the milk of a black cow was thought of as more wholesome than that of a white or
spotted one.” During the oral history project of the plantation Porto Marie, an informant
recalled that the plantation owner instructed his driver (fitó) to preserve the daily milk of
a black cow for a weak baby born on the plantation (Allen 2001b).
     Several studies have shown that coloured people too suffered from white elite’s stereo-
types regarding their racial and slave backgrounds. Planters still regarded them with con-
tempt and treated them with little respect (Renkema 1981a:95). Mulattoes were consi-
dered arrogant and pretentious, and were therefore disliked. Even though lighter coloured
people would have family members still under slavery, they often manifested racist atti-
tudes towards    those with a darker      complexion   (Oostindie   1995:161-2;    Oostindie
1997:57). Thus, colour also led to tension and antagonism within the black population
itself. One’s skin and other phenotypes, such as hair, mouth and nose, became elements
determining beauty. Announcements of runaway enslaved people not only included phys-
ical characteristics such as gender, age and distinguishing marks, but also labelled racial
features subjectively.”
    Awareness of one’s social position, decreed by one’s skin colour, was expressed in cer-
tain songs.

Yoradó yora yoradó yora                        Cry crier cry crier
Até kolo anto kolo ta kolo ku yama kuku        It is the colour and the colour of kuku (kuku is
Yoradó yora                                    a type of local black fruit)
Nan di mi keda ketu                            Cry crier
Até kolo anto e kolo                           They told me to shut my mouth
Yama kolo di kuku’                             It is the colour, the colour of kuku
                                               Call the colour of kuku

This awareness also appeared in proverbs, such as ‘Den gera di blanku, pretu ta keda mal
mira’ (In a quarrel among whites, blacks are the ones to suffer), ‘Na tera di galina, kakala-
ka no tin bos’ (In the land of the hens, the cockroaches do not have a voice), and ‘Kada rea
ku su parea’ (Every pot with its own ear)”
    The following work song also deals with the issue of self-perception. During the inter-
view I conducted in 1986 with Nicolaas Petrona (born 1898 in Kent U Zelf, eastern part
of the island), he recalled the following tambú song. His mother had told him that some
house-slaves had made this song under the instruction of their master when Tula, the
leader of the largest slave-revolt ever, was hanged in 1795. Petrona mentioned this to show
the extent to which the slaves lived both mentally and physically under the rule of their


74
masters. His explanation indicates as well that slave-owners also made use of the musical
role of the tambu as a vehicle for transmitting messages.

Papa Sewe,                                       Papa Sewe,
Ata Negru tribi                                  Look at that insolent Negro
ka lanta ku Blanku                               who stood up against the Whites
Papa Sewe,                                       Papa Sewe,
Ata Negru tribi                                  Look at that insolent Negro
ka lanta ku Blanku                               who stood up against the Whites
Hork’é                                           Hang him
Mat’é°                                           Kill him

This song identifies two social groups, ‘Negru and ‘Blanku’ thus showing the importance
attributed to race. It clearly pervays a value judgement regarding Tula’s behaviour: he did
not abide by the rules of submission but revolted against them. The verb Janta ku, ‘to stand
up against, is considered a negative action; it is mostly used in the context of a person
standing up against someone in a higher social position - for example a labourer versus his
employer, a child versus its parents, women versus men etc. Tula, a black who resisted the
subjugation by whites, is thus viewed as an insolent person, un hende tribi. In 1959 Bren-
neker and Juliana collected a song with a similar text and value judgement. According to
Brenneker his informant stated that the slaves threw hot mud in the faces of those who
tried to capture them.

Zino papapa zinowé                               Zino papapa zinowé
Neger tribi                                      The insolent Negro
Ra lanta ku Blanku                               who stood up against the Whites
Zino papapa zinowé                               Zino papapa zinowé
Tula tribí                                       The insolent Tula
ku traha papa                                    who made porridge of mud
Zino papapa zinowé                               Zino papapa zinowé
Tula tribí ta hala lechi.”                       The insolent Tula is milking the cows (profit-
                                                 ing?).


The following work song also collected by Juliana and Brenneker deals with self-percep-
tion. An informant gave this song to me in 1984. At the time he was 84 years old. His par-
ents had taught him the song. His explanation alluded to the emotional barriers the
enslaved people had set up to fight stereotypical notions of themselves. This agrees with
Genovese’s theory regarding the paternalism of slavery. Although based on the situation in
the south of the United States, this theory contains certain elements applicable to the
Caribbean - and, in our case, to Curacao. According to Genovese, in order to facilitate liv-
ing together within the same setting, both masters and enslaved people needed to balance
their self-interest with their respect for others. Paternalism, accordingly, was a way of pro-
tecting both groups from excesses possibly resulting from their separate, unequal posi-
tions. While this required an acceptance of the relations of super- and subordination
within slave society, in contrast it also implied the recognition of the humanity of those,
supposedly, lesser human beings (Genovese 1974).


                                                                                                  75
                                                                                        The
My informant used animal figures to demonstrate his argument and explain the song.
lyrics reflect an understanding of the ambiguity of  the socio-eco nomic  system, 1n which,
ironically, those in power depend on those without power. The bird he used to symbolize
the powerful, the Warawara (Caracara or Crested Caracara), is a local bird of prey - a
mighty one in the hierarchy of birds. However, in this song the bird depends on a small fly
for his survival.

Kinono solele                                  Kinono solele
Nochi pa solete                                Evening is falling
Ni karni nt yo yo                              Not even meat or salted meat
Ni karni ni yo                                 Not even meat or salted meat
Ni karni nt yo awe                             Not even meat or salted meat today
Ni karni ni yo                                 Not even meat or salted meat
Ni karni ni yo                                 Not even meat or salted meat
Ni karni ni yo*                                Not even meat or salted meat

The Warawara sings that he has been unable to get meat or yòrki (sundried and salted
goat’s meat). He has been flying the whole day looking for food. The night is arriving and
he is flying home. Suddenly, as he passes a fence and his wings go ‘gògògò’, a small fly com-
ing from a dead donkey sings the following in Guene, which I was unable to translate.

Ata tokoroko
Wawa é
Ata tokòròkò
Wawan é
Sayaneva


As the Warawara continues to sing that he has not found any food, the small fly comes out
of the bush. Then the Warawara sees the food. The informant concluded that it had been
the small fly who led the big Warawara to the food.
    When determining the nature of the interaction between owners and enslaved people,
one should take into account precisely who exercised control over the plantations. An
absentee land-owner living in Europe, as was common elsewhere in the Caribbean, was not
known on Curacao. However, local absenteeism was found in many places on the island
(Renkema 1981a:99). The planters would own a second house in town and live there dur-
ing certain periods. Owning a house in town indicated that the owner had commercial
interests other than managing a plantation. In 1819, for example, only sixty per cent of the
island’s plantation owners lived entirely off their plantations; 38 years later, in 1857, this
was less than fifty per cent. The management was usually left in the hands of an overseer,
the fitó, who formed an intermediary between enslaved people and masters (Renkema
1981a:99; Allen 2001b:12). Because of his position, the fitó could be approached when in
need. But he was not always loved, as is shown in the following song published in La Union
of 8 September 1937. The author states that it was sung during the times of slavery. The
lyrics critically portray the manner in which the relationship between the plantation
owners and their overseers is experienced.


76
Ora shon ta parti ko’                            When the shon is handing out things
Kasi tur ta pa fitó                              Nearly everything is for the overseer
Mas tirano e diabel ta                           The more tyrannical that devil is
Mas stérki su sopi ta”                           The stronger his soup is


 Specific expressions in this song indicate subtle protest. The phrases ‘mas tirano e diabel
 ta, mas sterki su sòpi ta’ imply that the fitó is rewarded according to the way he treats the
 enslaved people: the harsher the treatment, the bigger his reward. This song thus implicit-
 ly condemns those who were delegated by the slave-owners to take command over the
 enslaved’s lives. Ironically, some overseers were even chosen from the groups they would
 oversee; according to Renkema (1981a:99) some were black.
     There was also condemnation of the bomba, who in the main was a male slave work-
 ing as a superintendent: supervising the work of the enslaved people and seeing to it that
 the plantation’s rules were obeyed. If they failed, the bomba could exercise his authority
 through physical punishment. On some plantations the bomba was employed and the
 larger plantations had more than one bomba (Renkema 1981a:128-30). According to Rut-
 ten (1998:2796), there were also female bomba’s.”
     His powers are evident in the way he would punish disrespectful enslaved people. A
 typical example of this is the 37 year old Lodewijk, who received forty lashes with a rope
 as he had behaved disrespectful to his bomba.“ Because of their intermediate positions -
they strove to engender the trust of their master and to assert their authority over the
enslaved people - bomba’s sometimes behaved very wickedly and were therefore much dis-
liked by their fellow slaves.
     In some cases bomba’s were killed during slave riots, as in 1750, when a bomba named
Cadjo was shot down by his fellow enslaved people. Or in 1766, when a bomba was poi-
soned by two slaves whom he had caught stealing maize. In carrying out their revenge they
sought the help of a well-known herbal specialist (Rutten 1999:2796). The use of poison
for revenge shows the continuation of an act practiced within Africa.
     Some bomba’s were known as sutadó (castigation loving). From their recurring appear-
ances in traditional songs and slave-narratives commenting on their wicked behaviour,
one can deduce the impact they had on people’s lives. In the song on Bastian Taniwa,
‘Bomba yama katibu pa mi’ (Bomba, call the slave for me) two voices are present: that of
the slave-owner who tells the bomba Taniwé to go and fetch a slave to be beaten, and that
of another person, who says that the slave is good and that Taniwa should let go of him
(‘O, bomba laga katibu bai di dje’).”
     Several songs and stories focus on Ba Balentin, or Buchi Balentin, a bomba who was
known for his malicious character. The interviewee Henriette Willems referred to him as
Satan, the devil in her song ‘Oliande mama.” Ba Balentin became an important figure
within oral tradition, in which conflicting feelings of respect and hatred were manifested.
He was known to have fathered many children on the plantation of Kenepa. Many people
I interviewed, despite portraying him as a wicked person, claimed to be one of his descen-
dants. Roberts (1998:52) explains this kind of ambivalent attitude by stating that the intro-
duction of black foremen in slave society had a profound influence on the black percep-
tion of both the self and the relationship with the master. These foremen were the most


                                                                                           TUE
                                                                                              and
representative and visible members of their class, and their position of authority
                                        change  in the social structure  of the slave system. But
responsibility signified an important
it was also an acknowledgement that blacks      were  indeed  human    beings.
     In the following song Ba Balentin is called an insolent black who has shared a meal with
whites. The song was based on his relationship with a widowed plantation owner.” Once
again, the song is an act of recognition on the one hand (Ba Balentin has been able to trans-
cend the race barriers) while an accusation of treachery on the other hand.

Papa misinowe                                       Papa misinowe
Papa misinowe                                       Papa misinowe
Negru frijpostu a kome ku blanku                    Insolent slave has eaten with a white
Papa misinowe                                       Papa misinowe
Papa misinowe                                       Papa misinowe
Buchi Balentin a kome ku blanku                     Buchi Balentin has eaten with a white

Some details of Ba Balentin’s behaviour were given to me in an interview with Imelda Vale-
rianus, who was born in 1915.

R.A.: Na kua plantashi Ba Balentin tabata           R.A.: On which plantation was Ba Balentin the
bomba?                                              bomba?
L.V.: Na plantashi di Kenepa. Ba Balentin taba-     LV: On the plantation of Kenepa. Ba Baletin
ta un bomba hopi mal hende. E tabata mi             was a wicked bomba. He was my grandfather,
tawela. E tabata mi famia. Mi no por ninga.         thus he was my family. I cannot deny that. It is
Tin bisá ku e ta para na porta di habitantenan      said that he would come at the door of the
di kunuku. Tur ta pretu. E ta bin para na porta     inhabitants of the plantation. All of them were
di plantashi ku intenshon di bati hende. E ta       black. He would come at their home, already
bin para puntra pa kandela. E tempu ei hende        with the intention to beat the people. He would
ta kushiná den wea poné riba tres piedra, riba      come and ask them for some fire. In those days
kandela. E ta bin puntra pa kandela. Purá pura      people cooked in pots placed on three stones
hende ta manda nan yu bai buska pida palu           heated by branches of wood. He would come
kayente. E muchanan tin ku kore su tras. E ta       and ask them for some fire. The people had to
riba kabai, i si e kandela paga, enter e famia di   rush and ask one of their children to get a piece
e mucha ta hana sla.”                               of the heated wood. The child had to run behind
                                                    Ba Balentin, as he was on horseback, and if the
                                                    fire of the piece of wood extinguished, the whole
                                                    family of the child would be beaten.

The following song is also about Ba Balentin and regards the relationship he had with
many women on the plantation. It says that Balentin, the son of Machacha, would eat their
flesh and leave the bone, meaning that little was left of the women after their relationship
with him.

Mi t’et bai Kenepa                                  Lam going to go to Kenepa
Bai mira Balentin                                   To see Balentin
Brisa                                               Brisa (chorus)
Mi t’ei bai Kenepa                                  I am going to go to Kenepa
Bai mira Balentin                                   To see Balentin
Brisa                                               Brisa (chorus)


78
 Mi t’ei Kenepa                                   I am going to Kenepa
 Bai mira Balentin                                To see Balentin
 Brisa                                             Brisa (chorus)
 Balentin ei!                                     Balentin eh!
 Balentin                                         Balentin
 Balentin di Ma Chacha                            Balentin of Machacha
ku a kome karni laga wesu*                        who ate the meat and left the bone
Mi t’ei Kenepa                                    I am going to Kenepa
Bai mira Balentin                                 To see Balentin
Brisa”                                            Brisa (chorus)


It is generally thought that the enslaved were treated relatively well on Curacao, at least bet-
ter than elsewhere in the Caribbean. Lamur (1981) considers the high fertility pattern on
the island proof of their relatively good treatment. He believes that the high birth rate
among slaves was not solely due to demographics - a young average age when first giving
birth, short intervals between births, and few women never bearing children - but also to
socio-economic aspects, such as the nature of the work, the small plantation units and the
greater proportion of whites in Curagaoan slave society. On sugar estates the fertility rate
was generally low and the death rates twice, sometimes three times as high as on coffee and
cotton plantations.
     Römer (1977) states that by working enslaved people on Curagao to the extreme, a
slave-owner could only fail, due to the harsh natural conditions on the island. The expres-
sion ‘Katibu no por hecha banana’ (A slave cannot make bananas ripe) may be a good anal-
ogy.** Other studies have opposed this notion of good treatment, noting several examples
of brutal treatment on the island (Paula 1992). Moreover, there were also times when the
 enslaved resisted their master’s demands en masse: the revolts of 1719, 1750 and 1795 are
 confirmation of this.
     In my opinion, these debates regarding the treatment of slaves on Curacao lead us to
 miss the more central issues of enslavement, that is the commodification and dehuman-
 ization of human beings under any system of slavery. In order to understand the social life
of enslaved people, attention should be paid to the flexibility of social relationships and
interactions between the groups of different social and economic positions despite the
constraints of enslavement.
     In the course of the nineteenth century the Dutch government introduced several laws
and directives regarding the punishment and treatment of enslaved people (Renkema
 1981a:130-40). A gradual transition to a more humane approach to the enslaved is indica-
tive of the institution of slavery beginning to wane. Many slave-masters, who were no longer
allowed to punish their slaves themselves, considered this an infringement of their rights.
The enslaved, meanwhile, became more aware of their rights and started resisting certain
types of work and complaining about the work (as the new law allowed) to their masters.”
According to testimonies of former slaves the perception of slave-owners ranged from
good to bad. A bon shon looked after their well-being, did not beat them, gave them suffi-
cient food and allowed them spare time. The concept bon was used in the sense of just. The
mal shon, in contrast, enjoyed watching his slaves being beaten (while they had to say thank
you for every whip), or would allow a beating to last until he had finished smoking his


                                                                                             Ús)
cigar. Some sayings refer to this distinction. The expression ‘E ta manera katibu di mal
                                                                                     very
shon’ (He/she is like the slave of a bad master) is used for someone who has to work
hard to survive, and ‘Mi no ta katibu di mal shon’ refers to a person who is experiencing
difficulties in life and believes he deserves better. Finally, the terms ‘mal shor’ and ‘bon
shon’ indicate close contact between slave-owners and their slaves, and show that the lat-
ter made a distinction between the two, within the limited confines of their situation.
    In a similar vein enslaved people behaving insolently were called names. To be called a
‘katibu sobèrbè’ (impudent) or a ‘katibu salbèchi”® (wild) meant to be an unruly slave.
This could have applied to someone being disrespectful to the master, either by answering
back or refusing to work. An overview of punishments carried out by the police between
March and December 1857 shows that 8 cases out of a total of 76 dealt with these types of
offence.” Several laws allowed the planters to punish such a slave themselves, or to report
the incident to the Procurator of the King (de Smidt and Schiltkamp 1978:3-8; Gehring
1987:456). The term ‘katibu kastigá’ referred to a slave who was punished.”
     Other stories demonstrate how enslaved people ingeniously undermined the control of
their master and how they used tricks while undergoing punishment. Shon Pa, who was
interviewed by Brenneker and Juliana, claimed that ‘some wise (sabi) people tied canvas
clothes on their buttocks. When they would be beaten by their masters, the canvas would take
all the beating. They would shout very loud but it was the canvas that received all the blows.”
     Certain aspects relating to the treatment of enslaved people have lived on through oral
tradition in place-names. Descendants remembered several places where slaves were sent
to be punished. One of them, Plenchi di Berdat (the Square of Truth), otherwise known as
Plenchi bai no bolbe mas (the Square of leaving without returning) or Plenchi bai sin bolbe
mas (the Square of no return)”, was situated on the plantation of Ascencion. This suggests
that on some plantations enslaved were punished in public as a way of setting an example
to others.

L.B.: Mi mama tabata konta nos die lugá ei na    _L.B.: My mother used to tell us about that place
Asenshon. Nan tabata mara nan. Nan ta trese      in Ascencion. They would tie them up. The
katibu for di otro lugá pa bati nani mata nan. — enslaved were taken from elsewhere and were
Nan ta dera nan ei. Na Plenchi di Bèrdat. Bai    beaten, to be killed. They would bury them
sin bolbe mas.                                   there. At the Plenchi di Berdat (the Square of
                                                 Truth). The Bai sin bolbe mas (the Square of no
                                                  return).
EJ.: Komo katibu bo sa ku si nan hibabo Asen- _ E.J.: You would know as a slave that once they
shon ku bo no ta bini bek. Serka di e plenchi ei took you to Ascencion you would not return.
mester tin sobrá di hende.                       Near that square there must be some remains of
                                                 people.
L.B.: Mi mes a hana basta kos eibanda. Despues   _L.B.: I myself have found many things there.
e doftonan a yena e lugá.”                       Afterwards the owners filled up the place.


Some remembered a certain post to which slaves were tied in the woods of Santa Barbara,
in the eastern part of the island:




80
P.B.: Nan tabatin un pilá den mondi di Santa     P.B.: There was a post in the woods at Santa
Barbara, kaminda nan ta mara e katibunan?        Barbara they would tie the slaves to?
H.G.: Mara nan na pilá. Nan ta kòrta algun       H.G.: Tie them to the post. They would cut
palu 1 e katibunan ta keda ei. Nan no ta hafia   down some wood, and the enslaved would
kuminda i nan ta muri di hamber. Asina mi        remain there. They would not receive any food
wela a kontami.                                  and die ofhunger. That is what my grandmoth-
                                                 er told me.
P.B.: Anto warawara ta kome e kadaver.           P.B.: And the warawara bird would eat the
                                                 corpse?
H.G.: Warawara ta kome nan kadaver. Tabatin      H.G.: Warawara would eat their corpse. There
hopi warawara, yuana ei... Tabatin un bomba      were many Warawara’s there. Yes Warawara,
ku yama Piet Aronchi.                            yuana... There was a bomba called Piet
                                                 Aronchi.
P.B.: Piet Aronchi.                              P.B.: Piet Aronchi.
H.G.: Piet Aronchi. Anto eeh...    tabatin un    H.G.: Piet Aronchi. And eh... there was a preg-
muhé na estado (informante ta baha bos). Mi      nant woman (here the informant lowers her
no sa di ki manera, pero e bomba ei a manda      voice). I don’t know in which way it was, but he
nan koba un buraku 1 pone e muhé na estado       made them dig a hole and had the pregnant
ku su barika den e buraku. E muhé ta na esta-    woman placed with her belly in the hole. The
do, anto Aronchi a manda    un homber bati’é,    woman was pregnant and he made the man
keda batié te ora el a kaba di huma su sigá.     beat her until he finished smoking his cigar.
Despues ku el a kaba di huma su sigá, nan a      When he finished his cigar the woman was
saka e muhé for di e buraku... Mitar morto...    taken from the hole... Half dead... I do not
Mi no sa kiko a pasa kuné despues.”              know what has become ofher.


There are many stories of pregnant enslaved women being placed with their bellies in a
hole so that they could be whipped without harming the unborn child. They have become
part of a collective memory, thus showing the impact of these events upon the communi-
ty.
R.A.: Shon Elisabeth su mayornan a konta di      R.A.: Did your parents talk to you about sla-
sklabitut?                                       very?
C.E.: Wel, nan tabata konta nos di e tempu di    C.E.: Well, they would tell us about the time of
sklabitut. No mi mama, pero mi wela. El a bisa   slavery. Not my mother, but my grandmother.
ku den tempu di sklabitut hende mester a traha   She said that in slavery time, people had to
mashá duru, pasó shon a kumpra nan. Nan          work very hard, because the shon had bought
tabata biba riba kunuku di shon. Nan tabata      them. They lived on the ‘kunukw’ of the shon.
planta pa nan kome. Tin biaha ora nan hasi un    They planted for them to eat. But sometimes the
kos malu, shon ta manda bomba bati nan. E        shon, when they had done something wrong,
yùfrounan’ ku tabata na estado, nan tabata       would order the bomba to beat them. For the
koba un buraku pone nan barika aden i bati       misses who were pregnant they would dig a
nan.”                                            hole, lay them with their belly in it and beat
                                                 them.


Pregnant females were not exempt from heavy physical work or punishment. It was not
until 1857 that a law stipulated that pregnant and nursing women, along with children, the
weak and the elderly, should be given lighter work (Renkema 1981a:135). On a plantation


                                                                                              81
in San Juan there was a special room for women in labour. Although enslaved women
would also work as midwives, a midwife helping to deliver babies on a plantation would
not necessarily be a slave.
    There were also stories about escapes. Not all escapees fled the island; there are several
stories preserved in oral history, attributing strong character to those who were able to sur-
vive as runaways on the island. The story of Wan Pe, for example, is a recurring theme in
oral tradition. He was glorified as a special person able to defy the slave-master in several
ways. Yet when his master was sick and was carried in a hammock to town, Wan Pe forgave
the hardship and helped carrying his master. The moral of the story being that although
Wan Pe was treated badly, he bore no grudge against his owner and helped him when in
need. Below is part of an interview where the name of Wan Pe was mentioned. At the inter-
view the oldest daughter and a friend of the 90 year old interviewee were also present.
Unlike the interviewee, her friend did not want to say anything. She only gave a proverb to
strengthen the story.

Yu muhé (50 afia): Nan tabata konta hopi his-       Daughter interviewee       (50 years old): They
toria. Tata mes tabata konta hopi historia di       used to tell us many stories. My father himself
Tula.                                               used to tell us about Tula.
LV. (ta grita): Mi-Wan-Pé-di-
                           Toya.                    LV. (shouts): Me-Wan-Pe-di-Toya.
Yu muhé: esei ta e katibu ku a hui i kai den        Daughter: that is the slave who ran away and
pos?                                                fell into the well?
I.V.: Mi-Wan-Pé tabata horta den Santa Cruz.        LV: Me-Wan-Pe used to steal in Santa Cruz.
E ku... ki yama esun?                               He and... what’s his name again?
Yu muhé: Wanchi Kla?                                Daughter: Wanchi Kla?
I.V.: Wanchi Kla. Pasobra nan tur dos a bai          L.V.: Yes, Wanchi Kla. Because both of them went
horta den hofi di Santa Cruz. Un dia nan a bai       to steal in the orchard of Santa Cruz. One day,
horta atrobe, el a bisa e sua di dje ei no kome e    they went to steal again, and he told his brother-
milon. E milon ta pegabo. E sua a hòrta e milon      in-law not to eat the melon. The melon would
tog, (e tabatin hamber, no). El a kom’é, el a       choke him. The brother-in-law did not listen, (he
pega te tosa. Anto ora el a kuminsá tosa, hende-    was hungry, you see). He ate the melon and
nan a tende. Nan di: “Ta ken?’ E di: ‘Ta Ken?       choked and he began to cough. People heard the
T’ami Wan Pedro di Toya. Hendenan a kore su         coughing. Someone said: ‘Who is there?’ He said:
tras. E tabatin un pampuna den su man, el a         ‘Who is there? It is me, Wan Pedro of Toya (nick-
dale den pos. Un hende di: ‘Até aki. El a kai den   name of his mother Victoria). The people went
pos. Ora nan a bai busk’é, nan no por han’eé.       after him. He had a pumpkin in his hand and he
Dia ku shon Muhé tabata malu, ku nan mester         threw it into the well. Someone said: ‘Here he is.
a buta shon Muhé den hamaka, karg’é pa hib’é        He fell into the well’ When they went to look for
Punda, Wan Pé a mira ku nan no tabata karg’é        him they could not find him. One day the female
bon. El a sali for di kaminda e ta. El a pasa       owner of the plantation was sick, and she had to
man, drenta bou di e hamaka, karga shon             be carried in a hammock to town. Wan Pe saw
Muhé bou di kantika di gueni bai pariba. Anto       that they were not carrying the hammock cor-
shon Muhé a bisa nan pa no mishi kuné mas.          rectly. He left his hiding place, went under the
Te awor aki niun hende no saunda e buraku ta        hammock and carried the lady singing his guinea
na San Kristof kaminda nan tabata kanta kan-        songs all the way to town. The female owner
tika na gueni.                                      ordered to leave Me-Wan-Pe alone. Up until now
                                                    nobody knows where the hole is on the Saint
                                                    Christopher’s hill where guinea songs were heard.


82
Yu muhé: Nan di Mi-Wan-Pé tabata drenta          Daughter:   they say Me-Wan-Pe      used to go
den un buraku anto nan tabata tap’é gewon.       inside a hole and cover it just like that. On
Riba seru di San Kristof.                        Saint Christopher’s hill.
I.V.: Mi-Wan-Pé-di-Toya Ta bon ku e no a         I.V.: Me-Wan-Pe,   Viktoria’s son... Fortunately
mustra niun hende e lugá. Kaminda e ta drumi     he did not show any one. Where he used to sleep
niun hende no sa.                                nobody knows.
Otro muhé presente: ‘Bo no mester konfia ni      Friend of the interviewee: ‘You must not trust
bo planta di man, pasó e ta manda bo boka.”      even your own hand, because it controls your
                                                 mouth.




Slave Life: Economy and Material Culture
Work divided the lives of enslaved people into two distinct worlds and economies (Berlin
and Morgan 1993:2). One world was organized by the master, although contested and con-
strained by the enslaved people; the other was organized by the slaves, although contested
and constrained by the master. In securing a measure of economic independence enslaved
people would achieve their greatest successes where masters were most vulnerable. The
more vulnerable the master, the greater the enslaved’s bargaining power, with the niches,
in which their fragile economic independence rested, increasing. An important aspect in
the organization of the economic lives of slaves - apart from the nature of labour, the
requirements of particular crops, the seasonal rhythms and the organization of production
- was the master’s need to ensure subsistence for his enslaved people (Berlin and Morgan
1993:42).
     On Curagao, the principal way of providing food for the enslaved people was, as we
have already seen, an integral part of slave-work. The amount of food given to slaves was
regulated soon after the insurrection of August 1795 - by the Law of 20 November 1795
(Paula 1974:314). Previously, the law had only stated that enslaved people should be fed
‘properly’ (de Smidt and Schiltkamp 1978). This new law allocated more food to male
enslaved people than to female slaves: they were given five and four cans of maize respec-
tively per week. This allowance was increased in 1824 and in 1857. As of 1824 all enslaved
people received an additional can from October until March, as during this period work
was at its most intense with the planting and harvesting of the maize. Children would
receive an amount according to their age. In 1857 both female and male enslaved people
received six or eight cans of maize-flour per week during the whole year. Even so, these
laws were not necessarily abided by, since food production was always a major problem on
the island: provisions could be difficult to obtain (Renkema 1981a:135).
    Views differ as to the quality of the slaves’ diet. While some considered it to be nutri-
tionally very poor, others stress that it was rich in protein.” The Curagaoan Island Regula-
tion did not specify meat or any other products. In contrast, the diet of enslaved people in
the United States included game and sweet potatoes (Gaspar and Hine 1996:27). Accord-
ing to oral tradition a shon on Curagao would deserve the predicate ‘bon’ when he regu-
larly killed an animal and added its meat to the food of his slaves.
    Curacao’s climate and soil were unfavourable to agriculture. The special Thanksgiving
and Prayer days prescribed by the government in the eighteenth century give an indication


                                                                                              83
as to how frequently drought prevailed on the island (Kunst 1981 :212). Renkema’s
overview of harvest failures during the nineteenth century is also telling in this respect
(1981a:86). But the drought not only harmed the crops, it also affected animal husbandry,
which was undertaken as an alternative to subsistence. The island did not know the mead-
ow system. Animals - mainly goats - grazed freely on reserved areas (Hamelberg [1901-
1903]1979:92).
    Confronted with these climatic difficulties, slave-owners had several options. During
droughts, for example, they would import flour of inferior quality from the United States
to be distributed to the slaves.” Or they would allow them to work elsewhere, and with
their share of the money earned, they would purchase what food they could. It was com-
mon in times of economic adversity for the elderly and the handicapped to receive their
freedom, so that they had to fend for themselves. Stealing food from the plantations was
also common practice, as is documented in police records.” The priest Putman, who was
interviewed by the State Commission (installed in 1853 to prepare for the eventual eman-
cipation and to divise measures that would improve the plight of the enslaved people),
stated that slaves stole from both their owners and the free black population in their bid to
overcome hunger (Staatscommissie 1856:34).
    One solution was for the slave-owners to allocate land to the enslaved people, enabling
them to grow crops for their own consumption (Staatscommissie 1856:42). Berlin and
Morgan (1993:42) indicate that these practices, including the importation of rations from
outside the plantation, were not mutually exclusive and that they differed from place to
place and changed over time. Some slave societies in the Americas depended almost exclu-
sively on rationing, while others relied on slave provision grounds for most of their food.
More frequently, plantations developed a mix of imported and estate-grown foodstuffs on
the one hand, and the independent production of food by enslaved people on the other.
Slave-owners would allow, encourage or force their slaves to fend for themselves when pro-
visions were expensive or difficult to obtain (Staatscommissie 1856:42).
     Millet, also named maishi chiki or guinea corn (Renkema 1981a:86), was the primary
crop slaves would grow from the earliest days of settlement when given a piece of land -
called kunuku. They were familiar with this crop as it was grown in Africa (Thornton
1998:155). Due to its familiarity it was popular amongst slaves.
     Some enslaved people were allowed to keep chickens and goats, to plant vegetables and
to sell their produce on the market. The Guinee fowl, called galifia guene (Numifa melea-
gris), was an African breed introduced to the Caribbean which quickly naturalized to its
new environment (Watts 2000:144). This fowl reflects the religious outlook of the black
popular class, as well as its communal values: up until the present it is believed that with
its black and white feathers the fowl has magical powers and can protect the home against
evil air (mal airu). Because of these alleged supernatural powers the hen was not eaten, but
left to pick up any evil substances left in the yard.
Studies have shown that enslaved people used their recreational time to work on their allo-
cated land; their owners would sometimes give them time off for this purpose.” Enslaved
people were exempt from the 1820 Law prohibiting people from working on Sundays and
public holidays, as they were allowed to work a piece of land for their own purposes on
these days.”


84
Slaves on Curacao generally worked shorter hours than was typical on Caribbean sugar
and coffee plantations, where during harvest they had to work even through the evening.
They could thus devote time to their own subsistence after they had finished their day’s
work. Their working hours and holidays were stipulated in the above laws. The Law of
1795 defined the working hours from 5 until 11 o’clock and from 2 o’clock until sunset
(Paula 1974:314). This was further extended in the Law of 1824: from sunrise until sunset
with a two-hour break, according to the historian Renkema (1981a:132, 135) - a ten-hour
workday. However, the Roman Catholic Church was critical of the fact that these rules
were not always abided by.“ The Zikinzá-collection contains several songs indicating this,
such as ‘Bomba a nenga merdia’” (The bomba has refused to give them resting hour at
midday) and “Ta merdia’wo bomba’ (It is midday now, bomba).* The following song also
supports this criticism. Here again the message is coded. It is not the slave who is talking,
but a bird called ‘sokle’, or ‘choke’.”

Sokle a bisa mi bomba ta merdia awor               Sokle said, my overseer, it is already midday
Sokle a kanta, mi bomba na Wacawa, ayá             Sokle has sung, my overseer, yonder at Wacawa
                                                   (plantation in the western part of the island)
Sokle a kanta, mi bomba na Paradera ayá.”®         Sokle has sung, my overseer, yonder at Paradera
                                                   (part of the plantation of Sint Hironimus, also
                                                   in the western part of the island).


Furthermore, the laws also stipulated the days when the enslaved people were free, which
were Sundays and holidays. But this did not apply to herdsmen, gardeners and servants. As
with the governmental food stipulations, owners did not necessarily abide by these rules,
as eclectic documents reveal (Dahlhaus 1924). Besides growing crops to feed themselves,
the enslaved people fished, hunted and gathered food in order to supplement their diet.
Those who fished often borrowed boats and nets from the plantation owners. In return
they had to hand over part of their catch (Staatscommissie 1856:285). This gave enslaved
people an opportunity to develop their own domestic economy. Price states that fishers
were a privileged subgroup among the enslaved.” They were more trusted by the slave-
owners and possessed more freedom than other slaves (1966:1370).
    Plantation owners issued special permits to allow hunting on their lands. Among the
animals hunted were deer - at the time already under threat of extinction - and a red-
haired rabbit, which existed in small numbers on the island (Teenstra 1977:263). Other
animals, such as land crabs, were hunted with torches. Pigeons, such as the bula deifi
(Zenaidura auriculata), the ala blanka (Columba corensis) and totolika (Columbigalinna
passerina albivitta), were also caught. And iguana (Iguana iguana) - a speciality even today
- was hunted. They were caught by throwing a rope made of horse hair around the neck of
the iguana (Paddenburg 1819).
    Some enslaved people engaged in small-scale trading, thus taking advantage of the lim-
ited possibilities available to them within their master’s economy. They would also sell
products from the land in town for their masters (de Smidt and Schiltkamp 1978:337). As
early as 1710, the then director of the island Abraham Beck forbade some local residents
to allow their slaves to sell anything other than vegetables, fruits, meat or fish in the streets.


                                                                                                85
This prohibition was enforced due to slaves smuggling goods such as silk, linen, wool and
other merchandise and selling them at a low price (Brito 1989). There were also cases
where gold and silver were sold. Several laws were promulgated prohibiting this and sti-
pulating terms for punishment (de Smidt and Schiltkamp 1978:253-4).
    From the beginning of slavery, enslaved people also stole animals, which is clear from
the introduction of the Law of 15 July 1715, prohibiting Indians, but also blacks, both freed
and enslaved, from catching young horses, marking and selling them (de Smidt and
Schiltkamp 1978:129). Several overviews of the punishments given during the nineteenth
century indicate that enslaved people did not only steal food, but also material goods, such
as tobacco, silver spoons, ox-hides etc. An example was the case of Teresa, a 19 year old
female who had taken some small items on credit in the name of her mistress. For this
offence she was chained for a month.”



Social Life
One of the primary questions in this thesis regards the organization of domestic life and
particularly marriage. Most studies have concluded that enslaved people were not allowed
to marry. However, this conclusion is based on a western notion of marriage, where a coup-
le is recognized as being married when their relationship has been formalized according to
certain legal regulations, as in the colonial motherland. Very little has been done to analyse
whether, and if so how, slaves were able to develop their own customary ways of social rela-
tions despite the threat of forced separation through sale, relocation of their owners or on
the death of their owners.
     First of all there are some indications that enslaved people were willing and able to
establish a nuclear family life. The overview given by Jordaan regarding slave family
organization on the W.L.C.-plantations in 1717 shows a variety of family compositions.
Out of the 47 families, 40 per cent consisted of a man and a woman; 27 per cent of a man
and a woman with one or more children; 4 per cent of three generational families; 25 per
cent of a woman with children; 4 per cent of a man with children (Jordaan 1999:483).
Thus, the extended family type was also present, as sometimes families of three genera-
tions, consisting of grandmothers, mothers and children, would live together (Renkema
1981a:134).
    However, a stable family life could be hindered by their possible separation - mainly
occurring to men and women - at any moment. For example, an overview of the punish-
ment given by the police to enslaved people between March and December 1857 shows
several cases of men and women being separated due to their behaviour, for example leav-
ing the plantation regularly or staying out at night without the consent of their master.”
Some enslaved people left their plantation to visit their partners elsewhere.
M.D. Teenstra, who visited the Dutch islands and Suriname in 1828-1829 and in 1833-
1834, stated ‘that neither on Curacao and in Suriname there is something such as family
law. Children of 7 and 8 years old are being sold for 70 and 80 guilders, without their
mothers being asked for permission’ (1977:168). The relationship between mother and
child was sometimes unstable. Renkema mentions a case in 1836, when a slave mother


86
 requested to be sold together with her sons. But only her two sons were sold. With help she
later tried to kidnap them, but did not succeed (1981a:134). The traumatic effect of the
separation of mothers from their children has lived on in oral traditions and songs. The
following song was collected by several researchers and is still alive. According to Bren-
neker and Juliana, who first discovered it, it speaks of slave children who were separated
from their mother. They compare themselves with hens.

Katibu ta galina, mama                            Slaves are chickens, mama
Katibu ta galina!                                 The slave is a hen!
Shon ta bende nos, mama                           Slaves are chickens, mama
Katibu ta galina!”                                The slave is a hen!


The following song also relates to this separation, but here it is linked to punishment. Hulia
Jechi Isberto, born in 1881, had heard it as a small girl and explained that a slave mother
who lived on plantation Blauw, as she was punished to stay in a hole, feared that she would
die and never be able to see her eight children again. As a punishment she preferred to be
sold together with her children.

O Beilo, ma mi ta mama di ocho yu                 Oh, Beilo but I am a mother ofeight children.
O Beilo Shonnan, bendemi bende mi yu              Oh, Beilo Master, do sell me with my children
O Beilo, ma mi ta mama di ocho yu                 Oh, Beilo but I am a mother of eight children
O Beilo, yangado di tera abou”                    Oh, Beilo waggler from ‘tera abow
O Beilo yangado janga numa                        Oh, Beilo waggler keep on waggling
O Beilo, yangadó di tera abou                     Oh, Beilo waggler from ‘tera abow
O Beilo Shonnan, bendemi bende miyu”              Oh, Beilo Master, do sell me with my children



It was not until 1839 that laws were promulgated outlawing the separation of a mother from
her children under the age of twelve (Renkema 1981a:133). Yet this practice was not entire-
ly wiped out, as the following statement by an informant born in 1883 suggests. She recalled
that her father’s duty as a young slave boy was to look after the chickens on the plantation.
However, this abruptly ended when he was sold to a doctor in town. He stayed there until
emancipation, after which he returned home to live with his sister, his mother having died.

R.A.: Ma Tuda su mayornan a konta Ma Tuda         R.A.: Ma Tuda, did your parents tell you about
di sklabitut?                                     slavery?
G.A.: Mi tata tabata konta nos di dje. E tabata   G.A.: My father used to tell us about it. He
hasié semper ora nos kaba di kome. Promé ku       would always tell us after we finished eating.
nos resa rosario, promé ku nos bai drumi. E ta    Before we prayed our rosary, before we went to
konta nos kiko su bieunan a kont’é. Nan tur a     bed. He would tell us what his elders told him.
muri.                                             They are all dead now.
R.A.: Kuantu afia papa tabatin ora el a muri na   R.A.: How old was your father when he died in
1921¢                                             Zale
G.A.: Mi no sa. E tempunan ei hende no tabata     G.A.: I don’t know. In those days people did not
sa kuantu afta nan tin. E tabata bisa ku el a     know their age. He used to tell us that he was
nase durante tem’ di katibu. Tempu e tabata       born during slavery (tem di katibu).” When he



                                                                                                87
chikitu un dokter a bin pidi dono di plantashi        was a small boy, a doctor came and asked the
un yu di katibu. E dokter tabatin mester di un        owner of the plantation for a slave child. The
hende pa limpia su ofisina. E dono di katibu a        doctor needed someone to clean his office. The
pidi mi wela, mama di mi tata, pa laga mi tata        owner asked my grandmother to let father go.
bai. Mi wela a yora, bisa: ‘Si e bai, mi ta pèrd’é”   She cried out: ‘Oh, if he leaves, I will lose him.’
E dono di: ‘No, e dòkter ta soru bon p’e. Ta dok-     ‘No,’ said the owner, ‘the doctor will take good
ter e ta. Mi tata tabata un mucha e tempu ei, e       care of him. He is a doctor. My father was a
no tabata bai skol ainda, ni lès di katisashi. E      small boy then, he was not going to school yet,
dokter tabata biba na Punda. Su nomber ta             neither to catechism lessons. The doctor lived in
dokter de Veer.”                                      town. Doctor de Veer was his name.


Article 17 of the Law of 1857 stated that enslaved people would be punished if they ne-
glected or failed to take proper care of their children, or if they would beat them in an
inhumane way (1857/2). One wonders whether this regulation was introduced on human-
itarian grounds or served to protect the slave-master’s possession, or both.
     The communal life that enslaved people were able to construct was necessarily restrict-
ed. The Roman Catholic Church played an important role in the creation of a communi-
ty, as it offered opportunity for social interaction. Since the beginning of slavery, baptisms
provided a good opportunity for this. Euwens describes how the enslaved often walked
into town on their free Sunday to participate in a baptism at the Sint Ana Church - until
the beginning of the nineteenth century the only Catholic Church on the island. These
outings were outlets for all types of emotion, including conflict, sometimes escalating into
violence (Euwens 1932:124).
    Both enslaved people and manumitted former slaves would seize the main events in life
- births, baptisms marriage and death - as an opportunity to come together, reinforcing
bonds and expressing their religious beliefs. The rites of passage performed on these occa-
sions emphasized their importance to the Afro-Curacaoans.
    Deaths and funerals in particular, allowed for traditional practices to be conducted,
along with the creation of new ones in an effort to deal with the conditions enslaved peo-
ple found themselves in. G.B. Bosch, who in 1815-1827 lived as a vicar on the island,
describes a crying ritual at a funeral (1985:124).
    Music was a dominant feature of these events. Hillary Beckles states that music and
dance, above all, constituted the bridge over the troubled waters that connected Africa-
born persons and their creole progeny. The linkage of these cultural encounters, however,
represented much more than the passionate pursuit of pleasure; they were encoded with
noises of spiritual liberation and invoked the voices of cosmological redemption. Dances,
as these musical parties were called, embraced persons other than those gathered for a fun-
filled time, they also provided masks for enslaved people to share opinions on the issues of
the day (Beckles 2002:223-4).
    Very often western visitors referred to drumming, singing and dancing when writing
of their experiences on the island.” Teenstra (1977), who travelled in the Dutch West
Indies in 1828-1829 and in 1833-1834, wrote that both coloureds and blacks would sing at
the funeral of a family member, just as in Suriname. A document written in 1765 indeed
mentions the drumming of a group of black people during the wake of a child (Klooster
1999:507). Social conduct at these events was not always accepted by those in power and


88
harsh measures were often taken. Laws were introduced to regulate behaviour at funerals.
For example, during one period it was stipulated that no more than six people could attend
a funeral and that they must return to their homes immediately after the service (de Smidt
and Schiltkamp 1978:102-3, 137-8, 208).
    These regulations had to be repeatedly enforced. Social gatherings were much more
than merely the reinforcement of social cohesion: they were the manifestation of a sense
of spirituality. They show how Afro-Curagaoans perceived and experienced themselves in
the world. For example: rather than a departure, death was considered a transition to a new
status, that of the ancestors, (avochi), who remain connected with the living.”
    Work songs grabbed the attention, as earlier documents reveal. The aforementioned
Bosch (1985:200-1) wrote that the enslaved people sang work songs while they were build-
ing his lime kiln. Bosch showed the multifunctional aspect of singing, which besides pro-
viding entertainment, was meant to enhance group solidarity and participation. Another
author, named Abbring, stressed the profound nature of music in Afro-Curacaoan society.
He was amazed that enslaved people could still be singing songs, considering their tragic
plight (1834:50).” Abbring showed some sensitivity to the slaves and underlined the func-
tion and the importance of songs, dance and poetry in making their lives more bearable.”



Life of the Free Black Population
In the nineteenth century the free coloured population continued to grow. The number of
manumissions increased particularly after 1850, when they were made free of cost (Renke-
ma 1981a:120). Over time the growth of this category contributed to greater societal com-
plexity. Scholars have long recognized that in order to understand slavery as an institution,
and the status of free people of colour within slave society, it is necessary to gain a better
insight into the potential for - as well as the rate of incidence of - manumission. Manumis-
sion was based on the interplay of psychological, socio-demographic, geographic, econo-
mic, chronological, individual and family factors. No single factor in isolation could deter-
mine the greater or lesser frequency of manumission (Russell-Wood 1982:31).
    On Curagao it was a frequent event that enslaved people were able to purchase their
freedom through hard work. Skilled artisan slaves in particular were likely to have this
opportunity. The elite viewed them as ‘geldzoekers’ (money-seekers). Enslaved people
would usually be hired out to do specific work; a fixed amount of the fee went to the shons
(Römer 1980:25; Renkema 1981a:132). Urban enslaved people particularly, were hired out
and in this way earned some money for themselves. The question remains as to what extent
they were able to prosper once they had purchased their freedom. The fact that some
young slaves (who had inherited their slave status from their mothers) were later manu-
mitted by their already freed fathers, may be an indication of a degree of financial well-
being among this group (Goslinga 1956:111).
    In addition, some masters freed their slaves as an act of humanitarianism. They would
sometimes also provide them with a piece of land.” Some of these slaves, to whom prop-
erty was left, had either blood or sexual ties with their master. Documents show that over
the years these pieces of land were passed on to descendants as family land.


                                                                                           89
The nature of manumission was closely related to the economics of plantation life. The
least productive slaves, the crippled and the old, were the worst off. When they were also
granted freedom, generally this went without any form of support, especially in adverse
economic situations (van der Lee 1998:2). The masters were not forced by law to support
their manumitted former slaves, as was the case in the British Caribbean. Thus manumis-
sion did not necessarily imply opportunity and benefit for everyone. Mainly for the elder-
ly and handicapped it would mean destitution. After 1863 these groups experienced diffi-
cult times living on their own and having to provide for themselves. They would receive
government aid in the order of fifty or sixty cents per month. Circa two hundred persons
received this aid. At first the money was paid out to their former owners, who provided
them with food and clothing. Afterwards the district master paid them directly (Langen-
feld 2005).
    Of the total freed population, the proportion of people of mixed race was relatively
high, as it was usual for the illegitimate offspring of the slave-masters to be granted man-
umission by their white fathers. Some scholars consider the sexual relationships between
black slave women and their white owners, resulting in coloured people, as the ultimate
expression of the slave-master’s power over the lives of his slaves. Yet, according to Mintz
and Price (1976:76), these relationships are among the most complicated issues in African-
American history, as they went against the ideal of strict racial separation. This situation
did have some compensating factors for the slave women involved. Being the mistress of a
slave-owner brought along material and social benefits. The coloured offspring could also
acquire wealth and power in addition to manumission. Hence, the social hierarchy of
enslaved, like that of free people, was whiter at the top than at the bottom (Berlin and Mor-
gan 1993:2). On Curagao this social advantage gained by a female slave cohabiting with a
European male, was valued and expressed in the term drecha rasa: ‘to improve the race’.
    Among the freed population on the island there were more women than men (Renke-
ma 1981a:28, 72). The Table below demonstrates this.

     Table 3.4 Manumitted Slaves 1820, 1830, 1840


                       Male           Female        Boy
     WL 0)              877            2,047        1,160
     1-1-1830          1,063           2,166        1,200        1,392

                       1,166           2,190        1,492        1,584

     Source: Renkema 1981a:338


Curacao stood out among other Caribbean societies for its comparatively large free
coloured population. The social position of the freedpeople varied. Some coloureds
became prosperous. Some, mostly the offspring of Jewish slave-owners, were able to inte-
grate into a higher social level, especially in the field of commerce (Hoetink 1958:81;
Römer 1979:44; Rupert 1999:74). Others had the opportunity to become land owners or
even owned slaves themselves (Renkema 1981a:96). In 1819 a private school opened, led
by a mulatto (Römer 1992:38).


90
Coloured women in particular formed a large part of the manumitted (Klooster 1999).
The following example shows that they were also able to transcend certain limits. Maria
Manuela, alias Leyba, petitioned the government in 1862 to change her name to Leyba as
she was the illegitimate daughter of a man named Leyba. She was manumitted in 1850, at
the age of 35. Nine years after being freed, she was able to buy a slave and a few years later
a second one.”
    In general, the attitude of white society toward freedpeople of colour was ambiguous.
On the one hand they were used as a counterweight to the slave population by placing
them in the battalions of free mulattoes and blacks, to help suppress rebellions. On the
other hand they were often considered to be rebellious and lazy, and lacking in respect for
the white ruling class. It seems that as the number of freed black and coloured people
increased, the more racially conscious white society became. In 1818, governor Kikkert
even considered sending freedpeople to Suriname (Renkema 1981a:146).
    The freed coloureds were prevented from attaining certain public offices. James Agnes
Jones, a highly articulate manumitted coloured merchant - who spoke several languages -
was presented in 1854 as a candidate for an official function by the acting governor who
had recently arrived from the Netherlands. However, Jones was pressured to decline the
offer due to his colour (Sjiem Fat 1986:81). Some opposed these discriminatory practices
and fought for their civil rights, as was the case of the former slave called Joseph Kogen,
manumitted in 1833 at the age of 33, who was denied the possibility of being elected a
member of the juridical tribunal.”
    Freed Curagaoans were confronted with the basic problem of how to participate eco-
nomically and socially in society. At the final stages of slavery, priests such as Niewindt and
Putman painted a very bleak picture of the social situation of the freed. Niewindt wrote in
his letters how he saw freedpeople suffering from hunger, lack of proper housing, clothing
and medical treatment, and sometimes both the freed and the enslaved ended their lives
lying by the side of the road (Goslinga 1956:111).
     What possibilities lay open for the freed to adapt to their new situation? What chance
did they have of gaining a livelihood? The first option was agriculture. This was, however,
severely hindered by the island’s geology and climate. Their subsistence through agricul-
ture was also made difficult by the fact that by the mid-eighteenth century large part of the
fertile land was already given over to plantations (Renkema 1981a:17-8). The freed were
thus limited to using public ground, the so-called sabana. There, a large number built their
houses and used the land for producing crops such as maize, beans and squashes. Howev-
er, this land was mostly infertile and on these pieces the land owners were permitted to
graze their live stock. Their animals would eat the crops of the inhabitants. Although sev-
eral regulations prohibited this practice (de Smidt and Schiltkamp 1978:270) - this was
once again mentioned in the Regulation of 1849 as a problem for the freed - it would con-
tinue until the twentieth century. Thus sometimes legal measures may in themselves not
have been discriminatory, but their enforcement often was. In the same year the govern-
ment gave amnesty to those who had illegally built their homes on the sabana, but it would
act against any future illegal developments.” The freed were allowed to keep goats, don-
keys and pigs; their number being regulated by law.



                                                                                            91
Some freed blacks engaged in the trading of food-crops, so that portions of the subsistence
production were transported to town and sold in the marketplace. This could only be done
in accordance with the regulations. For other forms of subsistence, such as hunting and
sometimes fishing, permission was required from the plantation owners (Kunst 1981:212).
During slavery fishing was hindered by laws aimed at preventing slaves from seizing fish-
ing canoes to escape from the island (Kunst 1981; de Smidt and Schiltkamp 1978). During
the last years before emancipation, the number of enslaved people using stolen boats to
escape increased considerably, despite several regulations obligating the owners to ensure
that their boats could not be taken away. Moreover, fishermen had to obtain special fish-
ing passes, which they had to renew every three months, at the costs of three cents per pass.
These were shown to the head guards when they went fishing.
    Sometimes fishing was combined with agriculture. While workers were moving from
one activity to the other - dictated by the weather or the season - women tended to the
tasks of agricultural production during the period when this was required. Fresh fish was
sold by female peddlers in town, or they smoked and dried the fish in order to make it last
longer. Sometimes turtles would be caught at the Islas Los Roques or the Islas d’Aves
(Bosch 1985:146), which provided an additional income. Their prices were even regulated
by law.” Even though the work was tedious, fishing offered higher returns than agriculture.
Different fishing villages were founded, such as Westpunt and Boca Sami. Westpunt
became a large community, with a church being built in 1849.
    Qualified artisans could gain a livelihood by working as carpenters, masons, shoemak-
ers and tailors. There were also prospects within commerce and the shipping-industry,
which were well developed on the island. Men became sailors or dockyard workers.”
Unfortunately, no statistical data are available regarding the number of people who made
a living from these types of work in the beginning of the nineteenth century (Renkema
1981a:15). Women also worked as wet-nurses. I encountered a contract dated 16 January
1852 in which a manumitted woman agreed to breastfeed a babygirl in exchange for food
and clothing for her and her daughter. She would receive the salary of two guilders per
month at the end of the two-year period.” These women were usually called menchi.
    Sometimes people would leave the island in times of economic adversity, to seek a liveli-
hood elsewhere. Yet manumitted former slaves were still restricted in their mobility due to
the Law of 10 May 1837, stipulating that if they wanted to leave the colony before their first
manumitted year had ended, they should apply for a special permit from the State."
    A Roman Catholic priest, when interviewed in 1853 by the Commission preparing for
emancipation, stated that people would emigrate as a survival strategy. People travelled the
region in search of work, relocating to countries such as Venezuela and Puerto Rico. These
creoles from Curacao, as they were called in Puerto Rico, were mentioned as a seperate
group in the 1849 publication on Puerto Rican customs El Gibara by Manuel Alonso
(Quintero-Rivera 1994:27). Putman stated in his interview before the Commission that in
St. Thomas - at the time a Danish colony - there was a street where freedpeople from
Curacao were living and where one could hear only Papiamentu being spoken (Commissie
1856:297).
   As males migrated, women had to manage their own families’ lives to survive their
extremely poor conditions. They themselves would then farm their land or do other types


92
of work, such as weaving straw hats. During the 1850s women, and especially children,
would weave straw hats and cigar cases for a living. The raw material was imported from
the Spanish mainland and from Cuba (Renkema 1981b; van Dissel 1868). The hats were
known as Panama hats and were exported to the United States.” This was an income for
freedwomen living in the countryside rather than in town. According to A.W. Sythoff, ‘if it
was not for the making of hats, people would be in want’ (1857:112-3).
    Some enslaved women managed to migrate. Curacaoan women often left to work as
cooks or nannies employed by higher class Curacaoan families, who themselves left the
island in times of economic malaise (Hoetink 1982:33). For example, in a contract of 1852,
Dominga Hypolite Fedelle committed herself to work as a wet-nurse, nurse-maid and
domestic servant wherever her employer went.” Kinship relations were another decisive
factor for emigration. For instance, two months after having been freed in 1862, a woman
called Maria Ignes asked the colonial government permission to leave the island with her
two mature sons for Puerto Rico, in order to join family members who were already living
there.” Family reunification was thus an important motive for leaving and liberation was
used to re-establish kinship ties - wherever they might be.



The Roman       Catholic Church’s Mission

The nineteenth century sees increasing attempts to convert Afro-Curagaoans to Catholi-
cism. The Roman Catholic Church gradually convinced the colonial government of the
importance of educating the enslaved. In that way the Church played a primary role in the
dynamics surrounding the cultural encounters between enslaved, freedpeople and the free
on the island. Their lives were thus influenced not only by the white elite, but also by the
Roman Catholic Church, which became an important mechanism of cultural control
(Lampe 1988; Allen 1988).
    There is some evidence that enslaved people were baptized in the Christian faith before
departing from Africa (Martinus 1997:127). The evangelization of the enslaved became
more intense in the nineteenth century. At first the Dutch colonial government did not
concern itself with this issue (Oostindie 1995a:53, 136). It is stated that from 1700 until
 1824 the Church had little influence on the island, due to measures curbing religious prac-
tice, such as the admission of only one priest on the island at a time, the existence of only
one church where people could be baptized and hear the gospel, the prohibited access on
some plantations for priests, and - most importantly - the restrictions and laws imposed
on the enslaved by the colonial government.
     Even in these early times the Church did have some influence in the process of de-
Africanization of the enslaved. Priests contributed, e.g. to changing names of the enslaved.”
An article in La Union of 18 August 1971 mentioned that a priest named Michael Schabel
living on the island in the eighteenth century had made sure that the enslaved did not
receive what he called ‘heathen names’ in a bid to destroy paganism. Instead he chose from
saints’ names, a custom enduring until the beginning of the twentieth century.
     The arrival of Niewindt in 1824 (who two decades would become the first vicar apos-
tolic on Curacao) marked the beginning of a new era in the history of christianization by


                                                                                          95
the Catholic Church on the island. Upon his arrival, Niewindt expressed concern for the
enslaved. He denounced their poor living conditions and was able to enforce slave protec-
tion laws previously disregarded. With missionary zeal and in a dynamic manner,
Niewindt applied himself to their conversion. Despite many difficulties he did for the most
part succeed.
    For Niewindt, conversion to Christianity entailed more than teaching the gospel. In his
activities the term ‘civilization’ was a key concept. According to him the enslaved lacked
civilization, which he saw as being at the core of all their evil practices. Unlike others, who
at the time believed that blacks lacked all kind of civilization and were unable of changing,
Niewindt’s opinion was that their backwardness was not innate or genetic, but the result
of their descent from Africa, where no civilization had ever existed. This inferiority meant
that they needed to be educated and civilized. This encompassed certain virtues, such as
diligence, discipline, neatness and monogamy. He stereotyped blacks as lazy, careless and
lascivious, but added that through civilization this could change.”
    To Niewindt civilization represented more than only the refinement of behaviour. This
he specified more clearly in his arguments to promote education among the enslaved and
the freed. Apart from learning how to read and write, education involved learning the
basics of the Roman Catholic religion in which they were baptized; it also addressed their
obligations towards the government, their master and their fellowmen.” Even though until
1848 Niewindt’s ideas about education did not antagonize the government, it was quite
difficult for him to convey his ideas to the colonial administration. His state of readiness
in religious matters, as manifested in the building of several Catholic churches on the
island, did not leave the establishment unaware. They feared, as did others, that the large
gathering of enslaved during church services would allow them to realize ‘their collective
strength’ (Lampe 1988:104).
    All of this would change after 1848, a turbulent year for the colonial government due
to the unrest of enslaved people on the Dutch Windward Islands. Due to these problems
a closer relationship grew between the State and the Church. The colonial government
seemed to agree with Niewindt that educating the enslaved was an important device in
maintaining peace on the island and in safeguarding the lives and the property of the
other inhabitants. The State even began to pay the salaries of the priests (Goslinga
1956:130).
    Moreover, the slave regulation of 1857 guaranteed religious education for the older
people and general education for the young (Dahlhaus 1924:430).” There were oppor-
tunities for slave-children to attend schools founded by the Church. Sometimes the yearly
reports mentioned complaints that very few of the enslaved and freed living in the coun-
tryside made use of this opportunity. One factor contributing to this was the practice of
using child labour; due to this, slave-children were kept from going to school by their own-
ers. Poverty was another factor keeping children from attending school, as they lacked
proper clothing.”
     School was also an opportunity for slave-children to meet freed children, leading to a
sense of cohesion.” In various schools the children of the enslaved were taught basic read-
ing and writing skills, and above all catechism. Roman Catholic priests translated the Bible
in the local language and used other methods for spreading the message. Putman had


94
several young children living in his house to who he taught the gospel (1941:53). More-
over, some people were payed by priests to educate slaves and others unable to attend
church.”
    The clergy also addressed aspects of life which they felt were hindering Christianiza-
tion. This was manifested, for example, in the fight against colonial laws preventing slaves
from marrying. Slave-masters were opposed to formal marriage because this would not
allow them to sell their slaves separately. Furthermore, marriage was seen as a consecration
of the relationship between two human beings of different sexes; this was not an institu-
tion a slave was entitled to, since he was considered a material possession. Yet the Roman
Catholic Church considered marriage an important mechanism towards civilization. The
priest Stoppel openly voiced his concerns in this respect to the King of Holland in a letter
in 1817. He even proposed legal changes by stating that enslaved people should be allowed
to marry, that both civil and church marriages should be free of charge, and that married
slaves should not be sold without their partner (Stoppel in Lampe 2001:137).
    Niewindt would continue in this attempt and argue that marriage was essential, focus-
ing on the benefit this institution would have for the slave-master:

    The attachment of the enslaved to his master will become larger when he knows that
    not only his life, but also that of his wife and children lies in the hand ofthe slave-mas-
    ter”




In this respect the Roman Catholic Church was less successful. At various times slaves
acted against this prohibition. However, they could consecrate their cohabitation in what
was called a ‘matrimonia clandestina’: a slave couple would be married by a priest in a clan-
destine way; such a marriage was not legalized. Locally it was called salta garoti: ‘jumping
the cane’. Among slaves it was a valuable institution, and such a union was respected by the
community.
    In the process of christianization, the Roman Catholic Church fought hard to eradicate
cultural practices it considered heathen and which it thought were remnants of an African
past. In that sense the Church initiated a change in the behaviour of Afro-Curagaoans. One
of the customs it tried hard to eradicate was the previously mentioned tambu gathering.
The Church became increasingly concerned with control and took an active rol in the de-
Africanization of Curagaoans.
    All of these methods were efforts to prepare the enslaved for freedom. Niewindt played
a leading role in this and is still considered the emancipator of the enslaved people
(Goslinga 1956; Rojer 1997). Amongst scholarly priests, however, there is a recent tenden-
cy towards a more critical view of Niewindt’s role. Cees Streefkerk (1999) is less favourable
in his judgement of the Catholic Church’s position in the emancipation process and he
questions whether Niewindt deserves to be called the emancipator of the slaves. Lampe
(1988) had already opposed this view on Niewindt; he also focused on the contributions
of the priest Putman - who in general receives very little attention."




                                                                                                  95
Conclusion

Afro-Curacaoans did not form a homogeneous group. In assessing the characteristics of
the Afro-Curacaoan population it is clear that on arrival they were, and would continue to
be, a diverse group, both in terms of social position and awareness. Oral history reveals the
different ways in which this awareness was manifested. Race, skin colour and ethnicity
became important determinants for distinguishing people.
    The origin and dynamics of the slave trade, economic and political circumstances and
social conditions - such as demographic circumstances - influenced the lives of enslaved
people as cultural agents in society. Afro-Curagaoans had a notion of certain ethnic and
cultural practices from the African continent. This revealed itself for example in their
songs and narratives, and in their naming of places on the island, which they passed on to
the younger generations. However fragmented and vague these notions may have been,
they demonstrated the continued claim to a geographically specific African descent. Oral
history, in particular information collected from people born soon after emancipation,
shed light on how people saw slavery at the time.
    In their everyday lives, both as enslaved and as freedpeople, Afro-Curagaoans had to
deal with the reality of powerlessness. Much of their life took place within strict limits
defined by the institutions of white society. Laws regulating their lives were made in the
interest of the plantation owners. This manifests itself most clearly in the area of work,
where the intervention of those with power was clearly present. Some enslaved lived under
less stringent conditions, sometimes giving rise to a social bond between owners and
enslaved (“bon shon’), whereas others lived under harsh conditions with little interaction
with their masters. Oral history also reveals the hardships slaves encountered on planta-
tions under the regime of a particularly ‘mal shon’.
    The growth of the freed coloured and black population added to the anxiety of plan-
tation owners in particular. Over time the manumitted former slaves became a significant
group. Their growing numbers, remarkable by Caribbean standards, put the resilience of
Curagaoan slave society to the test. Apart from social and racial discrimination, this ‘free’
group also suffered from material distress, resulting in malnutrition and poor health. The
Roman Catholic Church did take initiatives to help them, adding at the same time a good
dose of paternalism. This heralded the Church’s role for the period after 1863, when full
emancipation was accomplished.



Notes

1    De Smidt and Schiltkamp 1978:3-8; Gehring 1987:3-7. These instructions addressed the type of
     work both Indians and blacks (‘swarten en swartinnen’) should perform, their punishment if
     they should try to escape, and their treatment by the whites. It is interesting to note that even
     though blacks and Indians performed slave-work, their women were allowed to intermarry
                                                                                                    with
     white men. However, this could only happen if the women had been baptized as a Christian and
     if they had been instructed accordingly — and officially accepted as such. Thus, even though Indi-
     ans and blacks were set apart as a group, at the time religion played a more determining
                                                                                               role than
     race and colour.




96
    Jordaan (1999:478). Undoubtedly slaves like elsewhere in the Caribbean were involved in gath-
    ering the prime materials for lime: conch, lime rich marine shells and island coral (Price
    196621375):
    Renkema 1981a:118.
    Postma 1990. Terms such as ‘Minase negers’ (negroes embarked at Elmina) and ‘Fidase negers’
    (negroes from Fida) were often mentioned in the case of Curacao.
    La Union, 18-8-1971, This article refers to the announcement of two slaves who fled in canoes.
    One was named Batista Vlaams and could speak the language of the land of Calabari in Africa.
    The author also refers to the Jesuit priest Dujardid, who learnt various African languages so that
    he could communicate with the people. The first written account in Papiamentu is a letter dated
    5-10-1775 from a Curacaoan Jew to his mistress.
    This rather close collaboration with European slave-owners is at odds with the way Luango’s are
    often represented in oral history. Luango (Angola) was an important state in Africa during the
    time of the slave trade. Geographically large and including a number of tributary states that exer-
    cised considerable internal control and that were bound by payments of tribute outside any
    administrative decree (Thornton 1998:xxvii).
    Putman 1937-1941. Putman lived in the eastern part of the island.
    According to McDaniel this differs from the West African myths, where only witches and spirits
    are able to fly. This ability could nevertheless also end once salt was eaten.
    Interview C.M. Elizabeth (born 1897), Allen, 15-6-1989. (NatAr).
    Idem.
    Hence they were called work songs, kantika di trabou.
    Interview Eduardo Tokaai (born 1899), Allen, 12-9-1984 (NatAr).
    Interview Shon Tin (born 1886), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 854, NatAr).
    McDaniel 1990:29 (translation by Frank Martinus.)
    See Chapter 2, Cross-Checking with the Brenneker/Juliana Collection’.
    Interview Reini Laker (born 1887), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 1025, NatAr).
    Unable to translate as it may be Guene.
    This may have had to do with the fact that a canoe was required to go ashore.
    Zikinzá-collection, T 416, NatAr. Brenneker transcribed ‘nabiu’ as ‘navluta, while Martinus
    (1996:200) transcribed it as ‘naviu’.
    Its inhabitants called it Genni, the Arabs used to call it Ghenoa, while the Portuguese and other
    Europeans named it Ghinea.
    Thornton (1998:xxii) states that Popo bordered on the Volta and on Allada.
    This land belonged to Martina Bonnet, alias Martina Kongo (NatAr, Archief van het Gouverne-
    ment, Brievenboeken 4e district, 1863-1906, inv. no. 136, 25-9-1894/107). The piece of land is
    situated between Jan Boos and Weto. See also Werbata Map: a map put together by the topogra-
    pher J.V.D. Werbata, who worked in 1906-1909 on Curacao (Renkema 1981a:270).
23: Werbata Map. See La Union, 18-8-1971.
24 Oostindie 1997:12. An overview of the number of slaves on the Curagaoan plantations shows
   that in 1735, of the 376 slave-masters, only 11 per cent owned more than ten slaves, while 73 per
   cent owned less than five. There was only one owner who had more than one hundred slaves. In
   1764, 16 per cent of slave-owners had more than ten slaves, 66 per cent less than five. In 1863, 62
   per cent had less than five slaves, 17.5 per cent more than ten. Eight owners had more than one
   hundred slaves. Most of the larger plantations on Curacao were situated in Banda Bou. Slaves in
   the eastern part of the island (Banda Riba) were more accustomed to living together in small
   concentrations (Römer 1979:16-7)
25 Els Langenfeld, Project Porto Mari 2001.
26 NatAr, Publicatie Blad 1857,nr. 2.
Dj Interview Simon Bonifacio (born 1907), Allen, 9-5-1989 and 16-5-1989 (NatAr). From his 18th
   until his 20th birthday he had worked on the salt-pans.



                                                                                                    97
28 Klooster 1999:506. See Report Commissie 1856:257. Compare Oostindie
                                                                                 1997:32.
29 Announcements about escaped slaves would therefore indicate in which places they
                                                                                    had fled and
     their assumed new places of residence. Furthermore, when slave ships were confiscated by the
     Spanish government in Venezuela, they would sell all their belongings, including the slaves.
                                                                                               to a white
30 ‘Creole’ refers to being born on the island, not to race (mixing). Thus it could also refer
     person born on the island. Menkman 1935:80.
31   The way in which the white population perceived blacks is reflected in the words they used to
     describe them as a group. Increasingly they were set apart, indicated as ‘neger’ (‘negro’). The
     terms ‘piecas de Indias’ and ‘macarons’ clearly show how the black race was seen as a commodi-
     ty.
32 ime Lucia Wederfoort (no age registered), Brenneker/Juliana, no date (Zikinza-collection,
   T 529, NatAr). ‘Cornea bam kunuku/bam kunuku bam kunuku/kornea bam kunuku/bam bebe
     lechi/bam bebe lechi di porku pretu’ (Cornea come and drink the milk of a black pig).
33 La Union, 18-8-1971. Until the present day the term ‘pretu mahos’ (black and ugly) is used and
     certain hair types are labelled good or bad. Expressions such as ‘mal of bon kabei’ (good or bad
     hair) are still common.
34 This song was collected by Brenneker and Juliana and sung by Pedro Clemencia (age unknown).
     Stored at the Public Library.
35 Juliana 1963:14, 42. In an interview, dated 11-10-1983, Machinet Sluis (born 1900) used these
     proverbs to demonstrate why, according to her, whites and blacks should keep themselves to
     themselves. NatAr.
36 Interview Nicolaas Petrona (born 1898 in Kent U Zelf, eastern part of the island), Allen, 1986
   (NatAr).
ay Interview Pa Allee (born 1899), Brenneker/Juliana,1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 906, NatAr).
38 Interview Eduardo Tokaai (born 1899), Allen, 12-9-1984 (NatAr).
BĲ La Union, 8 -9-1937.
40 Based on the plantation lists of 1862-1863 and on those of 1802 and 1819 (Renkema 1981a:128-
   30.)
41 The nature of the punishment handed out to slaves on Curagao during the year 1859. Koloniaal
     Verslag 1860.
42 Interview Wawa Willems (born 1875), Brenneker/Juliana,            1960 (Zikinzá-collection, T 177,
     NatAr).
43 Interview Henriette Willems (born 1890), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 509,
     NatAr). She sang: ‘mi t’ei Kenepa, bai mira e Santanas’ (I am going to Knip to visit the devil.)
44 Interview shon Pa di Zegu (born 1899), Brenneker/Juliana, 14-2-1972 (T 24, Fundashon Biblio-
   teka Publiko Korsou).
45 Interview Imelda Valerianus (born 1915), Allen, 27-8-1995 (NatAr).
46 Literally: ‘who took advantage of everything and left nothing behind for others’
47 Interview Imelda Valerianus (born 1915), Allen, 27-8-1995 (NatAr).
48 English translation: ‘Everything takes its time?
49 For example, in 1857 fourteen complaints were registered by enslaved. No action was taken,
     however, due to lack of proof (Verslag over het beheer en de staat der West-Indische bezittingen
     en van die der kust van Guinea over 1857. Koloniaal Verslag 1857, zitting 1859-1860).
50 In a conversation with Lucille Berry-Haseth, knowledgeable about the Papiamentu language, she
     stated that the word ‘salbéchi’ might be derived from the word ‘savage’,
Sill Staat van straffen van maart tot ultimo december 1857 door de politie aan slaven opgelegd. In:
    KV 1857, zitting 1859-1860.
ye, Interview Leoncito Blindeborg (born 31-10-1906), Brenneker/Juliana, 24-2-1972 (T 25,
                                                                                         Fun-
     dashon Biblioteka Publiko Korsou).
55) Interview Shon Pa di Zegu (born 1899), Brenneker/Juliana, 14-2-1972 (T 24, Fundashon
                                                                                         Biblio-
     teka Publiko Korsou). The stealing of a piece of canvas was cited as a motive for giving Theodor-



98
     us, a 25 year old slave, three months of hard labour. Staat van straffen opgelegd aan slaven op
     Curacao gedurende het jaar 1860. In: KV 1860, zitting 1862-1863.
     The enslaved taken there would never return.
     Interview Leoncito Blindeborg (born 31-10-1906), Brenneker/Juliana, 24-2-1972          (lt 25 inne
     dashon Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
     Interview Henriqueta Garcia (born 1898), Brenneker/Juliana (T 75, Fundashon Biblioteka Pú-
     bliko Kòrsou).
     Interview Celestino M. Elizabeth (born 1897), Allen, 15-6-1989 (NatAr).
     Interview Isabel Valks (born 1906), Allen, 13-3-1984 (NatAr).
     Goslinga (1956) and Rutten(1989) considered the nutritional aspects of the slave food very poor,
     while Lamur (1981:87-102) mentioned the ‘highly nutritional food’ as one of the factors leading
     to the high fertility rate of enslaved on the island.
     NA, Ministerie van Koloniën, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6738, 2-3-1863/138. These were motives given
     by H. Moran when he applied for a permit for the importation of a steam driven maize mill.
     Register van de door de Politie gestrafte slaven, 1857. Koloniaal Verslag 1857, zitting 1859-1860.
     Berlin and Morgan 1993; Blassingame 1975.
     NatAr, Publicatie Blad 1820, nr. 31.
     Niewindt stated in his report of 31 March 1828 to the Commissioner General J. van den Bosch
     that on some plantations enslaved were forced to work on Sunday (Dahlhaus 1924:90-4).
     Interview Henriet Willems       (born 1890), Brenneker/Juliana,    1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 511
     NatAr).
     Interview John Godden       (born   1876), Brenneker/Juliana,     1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 667,
     NatAr).
     This song refers to the bird revealing that people on the other plantations had already had their
     break.
     Interview Pa Allee (born 1899), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection,     T 1256, NatAr). Pa
     Allee’s parents lived on the plantation of Sabaneta situated in the western part of the island.
     His statement was based on data from Haiti, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Dominica, Barbados,
     Jamaica and St. Kitts.
     Staat van straffen opgelegd aan slaven van Curacao gedurende het jaar 1861. In: KITLV, Kolo-
     niale Verslagen 1861, zitting 1863-1864.
     Staat van straffen van maart tot ultimo december 1857 door de politie aan slaven opgelegd. In:
     ITLV, Koloniale Verslagen 1857, zitting 1859-1860.
ie Interview Pa Cai Maduro      (born 1870), Brenneker/Juliana, 1958 (Zikinzá-collection, T 487,
     NatAr); interview Matias Bertinus (born 1899), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T
     624, NatAr); interview Nicolaas (Shon Cola) Susanna (born 1915), Allen, 1984 (NatAr).
15   ‘Yangado’ literally means waggling, but might here be used for someone who walks with pride,
     referring to the bomba who punished people. The meaning of ‘tera abow here is unclear.
74 Interview Hulia Isberto (born 1881), Brenneker/Juliana,1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 560, NatAr).
15 Interview Gertruda (Ma Tuda, born 1883), Allen, August 1983 (NatAr).
76 For long, the older generation used the period of slavery as an important marker of time. It was
     referred to as tem di katibu.
Tai Roberts (1998:xxvi) states that a main characteristic of traditional African music is that it is
     interconnected with daily living. Music serves a purpose and has a social use.
78 Music and singing served several functions among Afro-Curagaoans. Mosley (2003:23) argues,
    in accordance with Gilroy (1993:74), that music has been the exemplary mode of communica-
    tion in the black Atlantic world throughout the period of slavery, as the Africans came from
    diverse language and cultural groups and there was no common spoken language available.
JE) The author lived and worked for ten years on the island. He was shocked one day to see a slave
    walking in front of him half naked with a heavy bunch of twigs on his head.




                                                                                                     oY)
80 As late as the twentieth century, work songs were considered very important
                                                                               by the employers.
      According to an interviewee who knew a large number by heart, he was paid to be lead singer
      and so set the pace of the work by calling out the lines of verses, which were responded to by his
      co-workers. He improvised lyrics to include events and news affecting the community at that
      time. Following an injury due to an accident he was not dismissed — as was commonly done in
      that period — but kept at work in order to continue his singing. Through singing Afro-
      Curacaoans could maintain and reinforce their religious beliefs and values. In their songs they
      expressed notions regarding communal life, pregnancy, birth, death etc.
81 See for example, NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6729, 27-9-1854/599.
82 NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6734, 5-12-1862/831. See also van der Lee
   (1998:596), stating her manumission date. Roset (Maria Manuela alias Roset, the daughter of
   Aldersina, belonging to the owner C.O. Leyba).
83 Staatscommissie   1856:247. The former governor referred to Kogen with much disdain in his
   interview with the Commission. See also van der Lee 1998:373.
84 NatAr, Publikatie Blad 1849, nr.228.
85 NatAr, Publicatie Blad,1829
86 KILV, Koloniale Verslagen, 1845 en Koloniale Verslagen, 1848).
87 NatAr, Notariële archieven (Curacao), Notariële protocollen 1846-1854, inv. no. 19, 16-1-
   WS,
88 NatAr, Publicatie Blad 1837 nr. 201.
89 KITLV, Koloniale Verslagen 1853.
90 NatAr, Notariële archieven (Curacao), Notariële protocollen 1846-1854, inv. no. 19, 13-2-
      1852,41.
91    NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6734, 15-10-1862/701. Being a former slave
   wanting to leave the country within one year after her manumission, she had to ask permission
   to leave. Clearly children remained with their parents despite being adults.
92 Patterson (1982) compared slavery to social death. One of his arguments was precisely the inabi-
   lity of enslaved Africans to retain their original names. See also Burton 1999:35-58.
93 Father Michael Schabel, born in 1662, was a bohemian Jesuit (Streefkerk 1995:159).
94 See Niewindt’s report, 31-3-1828 (Dahlhaus 1924:119-20); letter Niewindt to the Bishop of
      Curicu, 8-1-1850 (Dahlhaus 1924:438-442;444-447).
95 Letter Niewindt to the Minister of Colonial Affairs, 14-11-1834 (Dahlhaus 1924:419-420) .
96 Letter Niewindt to the Minister of Colonial Affairs, 17-7-1848 (Dahlhaus 1924:428-433).
97 KITLV, Koloniale Verslagen 1854, 1856; Staatscommissie 1856:278.
98 KITLV, Koloniaal Verslag 1855.
99 KITLV, Koloniale Verslagen 1855.
100 Niewindt (8-1-1850) in Dahlhaus 1924:438-442;444-447.
101 Allen 1992a focuses on the Church’s civilizing mission as a strategy to mould the personality of
      the enslaved and to make them more accepting of their plight. To the Church, a predominant
      factor in educational and social activities for the poor, social control was synonymous with civ-
      ilization.




100
 CHAPTER IV
 Celebrating Freedom:
 The Abolition of Slavery on Curacao



Introduction

  On 8 August 1862 the so-called Emancipation law was passed. The enslaved in the Dutch
  colonies would become free on 1 July 1863. Accordingly, the 67 government- slaves and
 6,958 private slaves on Curacao gained their freedom on this date (Lantérnu 2003:17).
 The proclamation was read out in Papiamentu in every Roman Catholic Church on the
 island. Events were held to celebrate freedom; people played music and danced; there
 were processions in the streets. These activities had already begun on 30 June 1863 and
 would continue for some days (Lantérnu 2003:21). In his report on the celebration of
 Emancipation day on the island, governor Johannes D. Crol stated that ‘everything
 remained within the bounds of decency. The recently freed behaved orderly and quietly
 and in that way their behaviour left nothing to be desired’ (quoted in van Dissel
  1868:512). In emphasizing ‘decency, order and good conduct’ among the recently freed,
 the governor attempted to correct some of the apprehensions existing about Afro-
 Curagaoans.
     Why did Crol need to concern himself with denying any kind of bad behaviour on the
 part of the freedpeople? What was the reality surrounding this event? Was emancipation
 an exuberant celebration of freedom or merely a calendar event? What exactly did freedom
 represent and how would this affect the former slave-owners?
     The enslaved on Curagao became free 29 years after emancipation in the British colo-
 nies and 15 years later than those in the French colonies. As a consequence of the abolition
 of slavery in neighbouring societies, slaves both in Suriname and on the Antillean islands
had become increasingly restless and had begun to voice their dissatisfaction. Escaping sla-
ves from the three Windward Islands could make for the nearby British islands, where they
became free citizens. When the slaves in the French part of St. Martin received their free-
dom in 1848, their Dutch counterparts on the island strongly protested against their con-
tinued enslavement. The already impoverished slave-masters, along with the colonial
government, had little option but to relent and also give slaves in the Dutch section their
de facto freedom, albeit with the proviso that they remained in the employment of their
former masters, being paid a small salary (Römer 1990:48).
     These regional events would provoke increasing uneasiness amongst the enslaved,
which necessarily affected the situation on Curagao. Such occurrences finally led the colo-
nial government to realize that emancipation could no longer be postponed. At the same
time, members of the ruling class began to consider the ramifications of this large group


                                                                                         101
being introduced to free society. What would this entail for those already freed at an ear-
lier stage, for the former slave-owners and for the newly freed themselves?
     There was less debate on the islands than in Suriname, where there was fervent lob-
bying by the sugar planters in particular (Oostindie 1995b:153). Most of the discussions
on the islands focused on financial matters, particularly the amount of compensation
slave-owners would receive from the government once freedom was granted (Oostindie
1997:56-77). Besides these economic factors, concern focused on the social conduct of the
soon to be freed slaves.
    These debates fall under what Eudell (2002) has labelled ‘political language’ Human
beings understand their social realities and legitimize their ways of life by means of their
language, which is never neutral, as it invokes values, summarizes information and sup-
presses the inconvenient. ‘Political language then, is one in the sense of idioms, rhetoric,
specialized vocabularies and grammars, modes of discourse and ways of talking about
politics, created, diffused and employed in specific circumstances by former slaves, former
slave-masters and government officials’ (2002:10).
    In the context of slavery, political language was used to legitimize enslavement in an
intellectual manner. Therefore-it was not solely a system of social inequality, but one
upheld by a cultural system with its specific conceptions of activities, its concepts and lan-
guage (Eudell 2002:8-9). Freedom also carries its own conception; the political language
employed in the context of freedom — as opposed to enslavement — embodies certain
norms and values. In understanding post-emancipation life this cultural dimension to the
issue of freedom should be taken into account.
    In these debates and discussions on the abolition of slavery on Curacao, the concept of
freedom is circumscribed by paradigms of values and ideas by which the ruling class
claimed and reasserted its authority, based on how society was instituted during slavery.
These ideas mapped the social position former slaves would occupy in society. Indirectly,
they reflected the perception of what direction Curagaoan society should take after eman-
cipation. Former slave-owners and government officials used their weight within formal
institutions to express their political views on freedom.
    Yet, former slaves also possessed a whole complex of attitudes, values, self-images and
notions of their rights, which they brought to the fore. Naturally, the experience of slavery
influenced their interpretation of what freedom meant. In that way they countered the
perception of freedom of those of the dominant class. In this Chapter I will describe how
Emancipation day on Curacao was celebrated. I will use a selection of songs which give
insight into the ways in which former slaves and owners viewed freedom.



Gradual versus Immediate Freedom

Oostindie (1995a) contains a series of articles which try to explain that the emancipation
of slaves in the Dutch territories was not primarily driven by economics. Essentially the
book argues against the link between capitalism and the anti-slavery movement made by
Eric Williams (1944). This link falls short, certainly when applied to the Dutch model.
                                                                                        At
the time of abolition in the Dutch territories, the Netherlands were experiencing strong


102
financial growth within a capitalistic free market system. Drescher (1995:25-67) compares
the diverse ways in which the anti-slavery movements evolved in the various European
metropoles. He concludes that these were not only induced by economic factors, but
increasingly by a growing social awareness regarding new forms of social conduct and
roles, individual rights and citizenship regardless of race.
     The relatively late timing of emancipation is not due to economic factors in the Dutch
West Indies, argues Oostindie. He states that on the one hand, the Dutch public simply did
not care for or knew much about these colonies considered insignificant in comparison to
the Dutch East Indies. Both the West Indies and slavery itself were hardly a matter of public
debate. The major economic factor in delaying abolition was the Dutch treasury’s lack of
available funds to pay for indemnification of the slave-owners. In the end, the funds were
derived from the booming Javanese economy. Exploited East Indian labourers paid for the
emancipation of enslaved West Indians.
    Wide cultural distances characterized the Dutch colonial empire. This certainly applied
to the Caribbean islands, where the tongue of their colonizers was marginal, unlike in
other Caribbean societies. In Curacao, Papiamentu was the lingua franca. Dutch hardly
mattered. What little Dutch influence there was on the island stemmed principally from
the Church, as colonial government tended to be a regime very much in the background
(Oostindie 1995b:161-7). Oostindie goes on to demonstrate how the various discussions
taking place in anticipation of freedom placed emphasis on the requirement that the Afro-
population demonstrate decent and orderly conduct.
    An important document which allows us to gain access to political language at that
time is the report by the State Commission installed in 1853 by the Dutch government
in order to prepare for emancipation. This report (Staatscommissie 1856) contains let-
ters from citizens who were concerned with the plight of the enslaved following emanci-
pation. Furthermore, it contains interviews with people considered knowledgeable on
island issues, having held important positions within society and having lived on the
islands for a long period. On Curagao interviews were held with three persons: a former
governor, a priest and a businessman. The interviewers were told about the social and
economic conditions of the enslaved and freed before emancipation. The report also
reveals ideas held by the dominant class regarding Afro-Curacaoans, both the freed and
the enslaved.
    There was some doubt as to whether the enslaved were ready for freedom. When asked
by the Commission whether this was the case, the answers diverged. The former governor
LJ. Rammelman Elsevier considered them ready; he was of the opinion that any post-
ponement would have adverse effects (Staatscommissie 1856:241). The businessman van
der Meulen, however, did not think they were ready for immediate emancipation. He
doubted whether they were capable of fending for themselves and painted a bleak picture
of possible starvation (Staatscommissie 1856:264).
    The fact that the members of the Commission asked the Catholic priest Putman the
same question shows that they themselves were convinced that emancipation was inevita-
ble — slaves were being freed throughout the region — and that soon society would consist
of solely free citizens. The priest was asked how one should go about granting freedom to
the Afro-Curacaoans. Putman was adamantly advocating an immediate rather than


                                                                                         103
gradual introduction to freedom, as the latter option would involve years of transition in
the form of apprenticeships or probation (Staatscommissie 1856:241).
    If freedom was inevitable, a central question then became: what would this imply for
Afro-Curacaoans? Or, more specifically, would they be able to deal with their newly found
freedom? Slave-owners expressed their fear that former slaves would be resentful. Insur-
rections against whites in other Caribbean societies demonstrated that this fear was not
unfounded.’ However, the overall belief at the time, which was constantly reiterated in
reports, was that when compared to other slaves in the Americas, those on Curagao were
calmer, and hence would not act upon any resentment held against their former slave-
owners. In 1857, six years before emancipation, van Dissel accentuated this aspect of the
enslaved: ‘The character of the enslaved is not so evil. In general they are quiet, submis-
sive and peace loving’ (1857:116-7).
    Yet the ruling class was not optimistic about the way Afro-Curacaoans would deal with
freedom. This pessimism was also grounded on perceptions they held of the free coloured
population. Indeed, in a report by the governor after emancipation, he observes a kind of
behaviour pattern among the recently freed which he felt had always existed among the
freed black population, namely the lack of responsibility in fulfilling their obligations (van
Dissel 1868:513).
    As we have seen, the number of blacks on Curacao already free before the end of sla-
very was greater than the number still enslaved. This was at odds with the rest of the Carib-
bean. The dominant class, thus, was already accustomed to a large group of freed blacks in
society. As was the case elsewhere, the legacies of slavery continued to burden this group
as it struggled to integrate (Berlin and Morgan 1993:61). In the eyes of the dominant class,
the freedpeople were less disciplined than the enslaved, whose behaviour was largely con-
trolled by their owners. For some former slaves, the association between slavery and labour
was so intimate that freedom literally meant idleness. They worked only when necessary
and occasionally enriched their diet by stealing food. The vision of theft haunted the plan-
tation owners, who used this as an argument against impending emancipation. For ex-
ample, one plantation owner cited the theft of his animals by manumitted former slaves as
a reason for requesting to fence his plantation. The government granted this request.’
     The immediate question then became: how was it possible to regulate the social behav-
iour of an enlarged community of free citizens, as slave-owners would no longer have legal
authority to exercise power over the activities and lives of these individuals? Two concepts
dominated the discourse on this matter: ‘morality’ and ‘civilization. In the aforementioned
report these words appeared in reflections on the character of the black popular class. Fol-
lowing emancipation, such statements would become even more outspoken. Blacks’
should be civilized and be taught moral standards. They often were defined as immoral
and anti-social, a population whose behaviour needed to be monitored and regulated. This
raises the question as to what the ruling class deemed ‘moral and civilized behaviour’.
After all this would be the bench mark by which the behaviour of Afro-Curagaoans would
be judged.
     Some were more specific about what they thought to be immoral and uncivilized con-
duct. They cited shortcomings such as lack of labour discipline, lack of work ethic, lack of
a nuclear family life, and dishonest and disorderly behaviour (Oostindie 1995b:158-67).


104
The ‘cultural agenda of reconstruction’ as Eudell calls this phenomenon, entailed setting
up a more detailed programme to teach the former slaves proper behaviour and new val-
ues, in doing so dispelling the old ones, connected to their African backgrounds and their
culture of slavery (2002:17).



The Roman Catholic Church’s Perception of Freedom
The letter written by vicar apostolic J.F.A. Kistemaker which was read out on Emancipa-
tion day, began by declaring that the day of freedom had arrived and that everyone would
now be part of society as a free person. ‘The sun that rises for you on the first of July, rises
for the first time for the free’ Kistemaker underlined certain issues in his letter, such as
work discipline, which he also affirmed as a religious activity. He associated laziness with
sinful behaviour, punishable by the State, but above all by God.

    Our government has also instituted a law aimed at people who do not want to work.
    Idleness ts thus also an omission against the law. Consider work as an obligation
    imposed by God on the people. Ifyou do not abide by the law, you will experience the
    consequences offree society, because poverty and misery will be your fate.’

Some behaviour patterns of the previously manumitted were held up as examples to be
avoided by the newly freed. This principally concerned the custom of some freedpeople to
work on Sundays and Christian holidays, making it impossible to attend mass. Often sla-
ves had used the fact that they had to work on Sundays and holidays in order not to go to
Church on Sundays. Kistemaker reminded them that this could no longer be the case. He
paid particular attention to the issue of sexual morality and monogamy. Whilst summing
up the characteristics of slavery, Kistemaker also mentioned that there was now no longer
a law prohibiting marriage. He expanded on this issue and stated:

   We expect that (...) as there is no longer a restriction on marriage, that you will end
   your promiscuous behaviour. We expect that with God's help, freedom will be a way to
   end this awful custom existing among a Christian population. We also trust that the
   government will facilitate the process of marriage.’

Clearly, this was a hint to the government to actively start promoting a change in behav-
jour.
     Catholic missionaries also had a say in the way in which freedom was expressed. The
following poem is one of the few preserved in written form from that time. It was part of
Father Euwens’ collection. The lyrics reveal the influence of the Roman Catholic Church;
the poem was most probably ghost-written by a priest.”




                                                                                             105
Cancion di libertat                      Song of freedom

Roeman nan gradici ku Noos               Brothers and sisters say thanks together with us
Pa cielo soe bondad                      For heaven’s goodness
Foor di toer bofoon noos tie é koos      Out of every mockery, we have the thing
Noos tieen noos libertat                 We have our freedom
Awé na bolontad die Rey                  Today in willingness of the King
Y pa boos di noos nasjoon                and the voice of our nation
PS rersctasns noos tin dilanti die Ley   Wenen in the eyes of the law
Liber die toer sjoon                     Free from all owners
Bam pidie Doos rodiá baauw               Let us ask God on our knees
Koe santoe debosjoon                     With holy devotion
Su bindisjoon pe és bon trabaauw         His blessing for this good work
Hasi pa noos nasjoon                     Done to our nation
Noos tata grandie goestoe y boon         Our great father just and good
Y maas sabi koe noos                     More knowledgeable than us
Manda awe bo bindisjoon                  Send today your blessing
Pa toer boon jieuw die Dioos             To all good children of God
Den bida largo i salud                   In long life and in health
Kontentoe motjoe koos                    very glad
Pa Rey, La Reyna 1 su jieuw              For the King, Queen and her child
Nos toer ta pidie Dioos                  We ask God
Reconicido noos lo ta                    Grateful we will be
Pa doechi libertat                       For the sweet freedom
Ma Dioos bo man so lo paga               But only God will pay
Y obra die bondad                        For this work of goodness
Sjoon nan adioos, na Dioos soe           Owners goodbye and from
manoe                                    God's hand
Lo tien in (Noos ta sigoer)              There will be (we are sure)
Amoor pa noos y bosonan                  Love for us and for you
Hoestichie pa noos toer                  Justice for all of us
Niengoen koe noos lo ta rabiá            None of us will be angry
Oen pober poor ta boon                   A poor person can be good
Pa sabi keen ta fortoena                 To know who is fortunate
Noos tien noos koerason                  We have our heart
Noos tien noos koerason                  We have our heart
Awe no tien kegamiento mas               Today there will be no complaint anymore
Ni manoe riba noos                       No hands over us
Noes toer ta jieuw stima di oen kaas     We are all children from one home
Katiboe die Dioos                        Slaves of God
Salud Dioos doechi pa trabaauw           Here ís to sweet God for work
Contentoe koe noos Ley                   Happy with our law
Y biba semper Corsouw                    And long live in Curagao
Hoelanda y noos Rey                      Holland and our King
Hulanda y noos Rey                       Holland and our King

Corsouw, | July 1863                     Curacao, 1 July 1863




106
The following song also conveys the strong influence of the Roman Catholic Church in the
expression of freedom (Lantérnu 2003:24). The author is unknown and the song was dedi-
cated to governor Crol, who signed the proclamation of freedom in Dutch, English and
Papiamentu. To a greater extent than the former song, it expresses a firm belief in labour,
distinguishing sharply between free and forced labour. It also expresses that the newly
freed should not harbour any ill-feeling towards their former owners.

Awe ta dia di nos salvasjon                   Today ts the day ofour salvation
E dia tan spera                               The most expected day
Ban gradicie e grandie Sjon                   Let us thank the important shon
Koe awoor ta goberna                          Who is ruling now
Si! Nos ta mashaar gradicie                   Yes! We are very grateful
Na Rey di nos nasjon                          To the King ofour nation
Gradicie na Sjon Willem drie,                 Grateful to Mr William the Third,
Jamaar Willem Bon!                            Named William Good!
Awoor si. Nos ta wyta klaa                    Now we clearly see
Koe e ta Willem bon!                          That he is William Good!
Nas e a haya                                  AR OET eee he got
E nombre di soe nasjon                        The name of his nation
I awoor tambe ta guierta koe nan              And now, he will shout with them
Nos toer, joe di akie,                        All of us, children of this place,
Koe’n glas di likoor na kada man:              With a glass of liquor in each hand:
Biba, Biba Willem drie                        Long live William the Third
Pa Willem, lo nos hasi orasjon                 We will pray for William
I pa soe joe nan toer                         And for all his children
Lo nos pidi koe devosjon                       We will ask with devotion
Oen bida si saloer                            A healthy life
I Reina lo nos no loebida                     And we will not forget the Queen
Ma pidi di nos korason                        But we ask with all our heart
Koe Djoos done prosperida                      That God give her prosperity
 I oen bida di bendisjon                      And a blessed life
 Tambe e estimaar nasjon,                     Also for beloved nation,
E nashon di libertat,                         The nation of freedom,
Bendishone koe toer koos bon                  Bless it with all that is good
 O! Djoos di bondad!                          O! God of goodness!
I toer e sjon nan koe ta goberna              And every ruler who governs
Na tera di Hoelanda,                          In the country of Holland,
Rekonosie na nan lo nos ta                    We will be grateful to them
Pe koos koe nan a manda                       For the thing that they have sent
Sjon grandi di Corasaauw                      The governor of Curacao
Djoos dona bo saloer                          God bless you with health
Na kompania di Mevraauw                       In the company of mistress
I di bo joe nan toer                          And all your children
Ai, papja danki na nos Rey                    Oh, convey our thanks to the King
Pe grandisimo bondad,                         For the largest goodness,
Di manda nos e dushi ley                      For sending us the sweet law
E ley di libertat                             The law offreedom



                                                                                        107
Ai, papja danki pa nos toer                  Oh, express our gratitude
Ne grandie i bon Nashon;                     To the great and good Nation;
Ma, bo por hacie mehor, segoer               But, you can do it better, surely
Si ta hasier di korason.                     Ifyou do it from the heart.
Ai, papja danki tambe pa nos,                Oh, convey our thanks also,
Na Sjon Ministernan.                         To the masters ministers.
E sjon nan ka kita e koos                    The ones who had taken away the thing
E marga di nos pan.                          The bitterness of our bread.
Adios Sjon nan, Sjon nan Adjoos              Goodbye owners, owners goodbye
Adjoos di nos korason                        Goodbye from our heart
Nos ta kontentoe koe e koos                  We are happy with the thing
Ma no a loebida nos Sjon                     But did not forget our owner
Ai, tene nos na nos trabaauw                 Oh, keep us at our work
Koe goesto lo nos traha                      We will gladly work
Traha pa toer Sjon di Corasaauw,             Work for all the owners of Curacao
Ma traha,... trabaauw hoestá                 But work,... contract work
Awe nos ta baljá i divertí                   Today we will dance and enjoy ourselves
Maaja tambe podisé                           Maybe tomorrow also
Ma na semaan koe ta bint                     But the coming week
Trabaauw lo nos mesté                        We will need to work
Ma no trabaauw, trabaauw forsá               But not work, forced work
Esai lo nos no tien                          That we will not have
Trabaauw di katibu a kabá                    Slave-work has ended
I Esklabitoed tien fin                       And slavery has an end
Ban gradicie na Djoos awoor                  Let us thank God now
Koe kantieka di gratitoed                     With songs of gratitude
El a kita di nos e dolor,                    He has taken from us the pain,
E kadena d’esklabitoed                        The chain ofslavery
Moestra tambe nos bienhetsjoor               Let’s also show our benefactor
Koe nos mer’ce e bondad                       That we deserve his goodness
Koe nos mer’ce e grandie faboor               That we deserve his big favour
Di haya nos libertat!                         Of getting our freedom!
I Roga tambe na nos Santoe Djoos             And beg also our Holy God
Pe dona nos bon trabaauw                      To give all of us good work
I forsa pa pidi koe nos voos                 And strength to ask with our voice
Saloer pa nos Corasaauw!                      Health for our Curacao!
Biba sjon Wimpie! Biba Hoelanda!              Long live shon Wimpie! Long live Holland!
Semper lo noos guierta                        We will always shout
M'awé guierta oen glas di bibida              But today we'll cheer with a glass of wine
Biba Sjon Crol, Bibá!                         Long live governor Crol, long live!


The following speech made by a man named Gerardus Vos on behalf of the recently freed also
displays evidence of Roman Catholic influence (Lantérnu 2003:25). In this speech slavery is
equated with misery and adversity, while freedom is likened to prosperity and happiness. It
thus tried to voice more than the previous poems, in the way that it triumphed freedom.




 108
    What a happy day we experience today, as we see for thefirst time, the governor par-
    ticipating in our insignificant midst, in celebration of this party for the people. Every
    African must be proud and record this day offreedom in his memory. It is the immor-
    tal William III, who delivered us from our state of misery and adversity to prosperity
    and happiness. Our ancestors went to their graves with laments, plunged into horrible
    darkness ofmelancholy, without hope, fatigued by tiredness and suffering as a result of
    slavery.

Once again King William III is credited with playing an important role in the abolition of
slavery; thus the enslaved were called upon to be thankful to him. This was reiterated in
the second part of the speech.

    Should we not show a thousand times our thanks and our benediction to the honorable
    King, who took us from the disastrous state of slavery and elevated our status to hon-
    orable citizens? Don't we now live in a more glorious era than the one experienced by
    our ancestors? Who should we give tribute to and show our gratitude? To William, the
    greatest! To the friend of humanity, who equals God with his deeds.



The Freedpeople’s Perception of Freedom
How did the enslaved people perceive their newly gained freedom? When interviewed in
1853, the former governor Rammelman Elsevier talked about the need to form villages for
the black population after emancipation. According to him, as a governor he did his
utmost to persuade the freed population to go and live in the areas around churches, in
order to establish villages, in which one could easily exercise police authority. He lamented
that it was not possible to inspire the free black population to become active and attribu-
ted this to their ideas of freedom. He maintained that freedom meant for them the right
to live where they wanted (Staatscommissie 1856:231-2). It is evident that the elite did not
perceive freedom in the same way as the freed.
     Even in the final days of slavery, some enslaved did not wait for emancipation. The
large number of escapes during the last years of slavery demonstrates an ardent desire for
freedom. These numbers were even higher than the official figures stated, as slave-owners
did not always inform the authorities of slaves having escaped, fearing that they would
receive less or even no compensation at the end of slavery.’ A population census for the
control of finance conducted on 5 January 1857 on Curacao indicates a disparity of 280
slaves, which was attributed to the fact that slave-owners had not registered the death or
escapes of their slaves.’
    Boats were commonly used to escape. During my research I met a woman born in
1886, whose enslaved grandmother and sister had fled to Carthagena, Columbia in a boat
transporting dividivi;’ they were aided in their escape by the captain.” The escape from the
island as a manifestation of the general desire for freedom is also supported in informa-
tion the governor received regarding slaves who had fled to Venezuela and St. Thomas.
They had informed their masters that they had done so, not because they were treated


                                                                                             109
badly, but out of an urge to be free. But as they found themselves treated harshly in the
places they had fled to, they would have liked to return to Curacao, but feared punishment,
so would rather go back at the time of emancipation — in doing so, making it possible for
their masters to receive the compensation payable for each slave freed."
    As early as the 1850s rumours were circulating regarding the approach of freedom. The
editor of the Kerkelijke Courant stated in 1862 that the enslaved had already been promised
freedom circa ten years previously." It is evident that slaves anticipated freedom well befo-
re 1863 and gradually became more and more anxious about the prospect. In a letter dated
31 October 1862, the Attorney General informed the district masters that some slaves from
town were planning to thank the governor on the coming Sunday for the expected eman-
cipation. The Attorney General feared that the plantation slaves would follow this exam-
ple and therefore requested the district masters to tell them that emancipation would be
due on the first of July the following year and they could thank them then.”
    The question arises as to whether they sang the following song due to their discontent
with waiting endlessly. A woman born in 1916, whose father’s mother sang this song while
doing her daily chores, remembered it. She explained that the enslaved felt taken advanta-
ge of by King William III, who presumably had promised them freedom, which again and
again failed to materialize. In this song the role of William III in the abolition of slavery is
not taken for granted. It expresses a feeling of anxiety due to the concern that freedom was
being withheld.

Biba biba biba biba Wilmu Dèrdu                  Long live, long live William the Third
Biba biba biba biba Wilmu Derdu                  Long live, long live William the Third
Ma parse Wilmu Dèrdu                             But it seems William the Third
Bo tin idea di frega nos                         You are thinking of making a fool of us
Ma pa bo frega nos                               But instead of making a fool of us
Bo bai frega bo mama.”                           Go and fool your mother


The following variant of a similar song was collected by Juliana and Brenneker in the 1960s
from Ma Djini, living in Otrobanda, who was born in 1869, six years after emancipation.

Ta ki ora Rei ta bini                            When is the King coming
Ki ora rei ta manda libertat                     When is the King sending freedom
Rei ta pompa                                     The King is fooling
Rei ta pompa                                     The King is fooling
Rei bai pompa rei su mama."                      The King should go fool his mother


The following song expressed a similar feeling and is intended as a demand:

Libertat, galité                                 Freedom, equality
La reina Viktoria                                Queen Victoria
Manda e kos pa nos!                              Send the thing for us!
Libertat, galité                                 Freedom, equality
La reina Viktoria                                Queen Victoria



110
Manda e kos pa nos!                                  Send the thing for us!
Libertat, galité                                     Freedom, equality
Willem de derde                                      William the Third
Manda e kos pa nos!”                                 Send the thing for us!

And finally:

Barku a bai, barku a bin                             Ships come and ships go
Ta ki nobo Rei a manda?                              Is there any news from the King?
Ken ka bini                                          Everyone who arrives
Nan a laga rei na soni."                             (says) they left the King asleep


This correlates with the following account, in which someone is accused of withholding
emancipation. It reveals restlessness amongst the slaves as they await freedom. It also
shows how the people in Banda Bou mythologized the previously mentioned bomba Ba
Balentin, who was considered wicked. They attributed to him an important role in the
delay of freedom.

Ba Balentin fitó, mester a pasa Sabaneta, Seiro-     Ba Balentin, the slave overseer, had to visit the
ma, Lagun 1 Kenepa. El a pasa Sabaneta sin           plantations Sabaneta, Seiroma, Lagun and
duna libertat, paso e tabata mal kontentu ku         Kenepa. He called at Sabaneta without giving
Lareina a kumpra tur kabes di katibu pa kuen-        the slaves their freedom, because he was not sat-
ta di 50 florin pa kabes. La reina” a bisa ku e no   isfied that the Queen had bought the slaves for
ta kasa bou di bandera manchá pa krimen di           fifty guilders each. The Queen refused to marry
sklabitut. Ba Balentin a duna libertat na Seiro-      under a flag blemished by the crime of slavery.
ma ku Lagun ku Kenepa. Seiroma ku Lagun ku           Ba Balentin gave freedom to the slaves on the
Kenepa.”                                             plantations Seiroma, Lagun and Kenepa.


Here it is not a royal figure responsible for the delay, but a wicked bomba, someone be-
longing to their own group presumably holding a grudge against the enslaved on a certain
plantation. Indirectly, the bomba is recognized as having overall power.
    In one of the above songs the name of Queen Victoria appears. Former slaves in the
British colonies considered Queen Victoria as the person responsible for their freedom. In
Jamaica this led her to be called ‘Queen Free’ (Lewin 1984:18). The informant could not
give any explanation as to why Queen Victoria was mentioned.
    She is mentioned once again in the lyrics of the following song. Martina Felipe, whom
I interviewed in 1983, was born in 1893 and remembered her grandmother singing it.”
According to Martina Felipe, freedom was given to Curacaoan slaves after people had
denounced the atrocities of slavery to the authorities in Holland. This shows recognition
of a power above that of the local colonial government. For some reason she assumed
Queen Victoria to be the wife of William III.” Naming Queen Victoria in songs relating to
freedom may be an indication that slaves on Curacao were aware that their counterparts
in the British colonies had long since gained freedom under the reign of Queen Victoria.
It could be interpreted as a request to the Queen to free the slaves in the Dutch colonies in
the same way. Hence the notion of a demand is manifested in the following song sung by


                                                                                                  Wala
Martina Felipe:

Libertat, galité                                Freedom, equality
La reina Viktoria                               Queen Victoria
A manda e kos                                   Send the thing
La reina Viktoria                               Queen Victoria
A manda e ko’                                   Send the thing
Libertat, galité                                Freedom, equality



The words ‘libertat’ and ‘galité’, derived from the French word “égalité, a legacy of the
French Revolution, were rekindled by the former slaves to express their joy of their newly
found freedom. In a sense it reflects their understanding that freedom is an important con-
dition for equality (Brenneker 1970:1770).”

Awo’ tin shon Henri,                            Now there is no Master Henry anymore
tin shon de Palm                                Neither Master de Palm
N’tin nada mas                                  There is nothing more
Awo’ nos tur ta un                              We are all one
Awo’ nos tur ta un                              We are all one
Awo’ djaka lo laba tayo                         Now rats will do the dishes
Awo’ djaka lo frega kuchu                       Now rats will clean the knives
Awo’ djaka lo bari fogon                        Now rats will sweep the oven
kaiman djuku, djuku kaiman”                     No more submission, submission no more



The embodiment of equality is clearly expressed in the last sentence ‘kaiman djuku,
djuku kaiman'. Martinus (1997), who analysed the Guene in relation to Caboverdian
language, states that this sentence is equivalent to the Portuguese ‘No mais yugo, yugo no
mais, meaning no more submission.”
    In one of the songs on freedom sang by Ma Djini, this fact was again stressed.”

Awor ku katibu a kaba, r’tin katibu mas. Awor   Now that slavery has ended, there is no slavery
ku libertat a bini, awor mi no ta laba tayo.    anymore. Now that freedom has come, I won’t
Awor ta djaka ta laba tayo (laughter).          wash any dishes anymore. Now rats will wash
                                                the dishes.

‘No more punishment is a recurrent theme in traditional songs relating to freedom, as the
following song demonstrates. Furthermore, it reveals what the slaves experienced as trau-
matic: it purveys the physical reality of being put in irons and being beaten. The notion of
what freedom entailed, was also clearly expressed. It vents anger at what occurred during
slavery and shows the slaves’ aspirations regarding their new lives once free. The notion of
being dependent during slavery is contrasted with independence after slavery. Several
variants of this song have been collected over the years. The last verse of most of these
songs ends with the conviction that with freedom one of the most humiliating tasks,
washing someone else’s chamber pot, would also end. The following is the oldest recorded


 112
variant and was sung by a woman called Ma Chichi, who was interviewed by Brenneker in
1958 at the age of 106.” She was ten years old when the enslaved gained their freedom.

Kaiman djuku                                      No more submission
Djuku kaiman                                      Submission no more
Mi r’ta laba tayó                                 I am not doing dishes
Mi w ta laba kònchi mas                           Lam not washing the bowls anymore
Mi n’ ta bari kas mas                             I am not sweeping the house anymore
Mi no ta katibu di shon mas.”                     Lam not his master’s slave anymore


A second variant also emphasizes the treatment slaves had received:

Libertat galité                                   Freedom, equality
Mi shon n’ por bistimi heru mas                   My master won't put iron-bars on me anymore
Libertat galité                                   Freedom, equality
Mi shon n’ por bistimi heru mas                   My master won't put iron-bars on me anymore
Libertat galité                                   Freedom, equality
Shon n’por suta katibu mas                        The master cannot beat slaves anymore
Libertat galité                                   Freedom, equality
Shon n’por suta katibu mas                        The master cannot beat slaves anymore
Libertat galité                                   Freedom, equality
Shon muhé mes lo laba tayo                        The mistress herself will do her dishes
Libertat galité                                   Freedom, equality
Shon homber mes lo laba koprá.”                   The master himself will wash his chamber pot



And yet a third variant:

Libertat galité                                   Freedom, equality
Shon muhé mes lo laba tayo                        The mistress herself will do her dishes
Libertat galité                                   Freedom, equality
Pushi mes lo laba tayo                            The cat will wash the dishes
Libertat galité                                   Freedom, equality
Shon homber mes lo laba kopra.”                   The master himself will wash his chamber pot


The two stanzas in these variants seem to sustain the common masters’ question at the
time of emancipation: will the manumitted former slaves work? The idea of ‘lazy blacks’
was a recurring theme in nineteenth-century literature. The above songs, of course, can
also be read as a clear expression of people’s desire to make choices in their lives, this only
being possible once free.
    The next informant was born in 1900 and learned about slavery from his grandfather.
He displayed the awareness that slave-owners had received compensation for their slaves.
His grandfather was a slave on one of the plantations near town and had related to him the
atrocities of slavery.



                                                                                            113
R.E: Tempu di sklabitut tabata un tempu hori-       R.E: Slavery was a horrible time. Many took the
bel. Hopi di nan a drenta boto di kanoa bai         canoe to Coro. Many reached Coro and many
Coro. Hopi di nan a yega Coro 1 hopi a hoga         also drowned when their canoes turned over.
tambe ora nan kanoa a bòltu. Ora klòk di liber-     When frecdom came, things changed. Freedom
tat abati, kos a kambia. Libertat a yega na yüli.   came in July. Freedom came with a lot of barrels
Libertat a yega ku hopi bari di plaka.              of money.
P.B.: Bari di plaka?                                P.B.: Barrels of money?
R.F: Si, bari di plaka pa libra esnan               R.E:   Yes, barrels   of money   to liberate   the
sklabisá. Rei a manda nan.                          enslaved. The King sent them.
P.B.: Rei a manda nan?                              PB.: The King sent them?
E.J.: Rei a manda plaka na bari?”                   E.J.: The King sent money in barrels?


To Lai the end of enslavement was equated to payment for work. He considered this the
reason why the slave-owners had received compensation. He continued:


R.E: Sí, bari ku hopi plaka pa libra hendenan       R.F: Yes, barrels with a lot of money to free peo-
na Bándabou i na Bándariba. Hopi katibu:            ple in Bandabou and Bandariba. Lots of    slaves:
mucha, adulto, tur e katibunan. Si bo tabata ke     children, adults, all the slaves. Ifyou wanted
pa nan traha pa bo, e ora ei lo bo mester a paga    them to work for you, then you would have to
nan. Si.                                            pay them. Yes.
P.B.: Rei a manda un bari di plaka?                 P.B.: The King sent a barrel of money?
R.E: Katibunan a fiesta tres dia largu. Tres dia    R.F: The slaves feasted for three long days.
largu na Kòrsou. Tur hende tabata liber na          Three long days in Curacao. Everybody was free
Kòrsou. No tabatin kuenta di bati hende mas.        in Curacao. Nobody would be beaten anymore.
Sia                                                 Yes.


A similar story is being told as follows:

E kueba di Chichi ta di den tempu di katibu.        Chichi’s cave (Chichi is the name of a female
Chichi a hui na estado bai ku su kompan’é.          slave) existed during slavery. Chichi fled togeth-
Nan ta katibu. Nan ta kobarde pa sali. Un           er with her partner while she was pregnant.
biaha ku e homber a bai Gato, bai buska             They were enslaved. They were afraid to come
kuminda, nan a mustr’é ku na Kòrsou tin li-         out. Once when the man went to Gato, people
bertat i el a disidi di bai bèk serka su dono.      explained to him that there was freedom now
                                                    and he decided to go back to his master.
E shon yama Carlo Aster di Malpais. Kontentu        The shon’s name was Carlo Aster from Malpais.
shon a risibi e ku Chichi ku e tres yunan, paso-    The shon was happy to welcome him and
bra pa kada katibu ku bira liber shon ta risibi     Chichi and their three children because he
plaka. Asina shon a hana 5 biaha 200 florin. Pa     would receive money for each slave that became
kada katibu rei a paga 200. Willem de derde a       free. So the shon received 5 times 200 guilders.
kumpra kada katibu pa 200.”                          William the Third bought each slave for 200
                                                    guilders.

These notions were also expressed in traditional songs, such as the one collected by Bren-
neker and Juliana in 1960 from a male informant born in 1875.32




114
Muchu danki shon Wilmu di derdu,                Thank you very much King William the Third
ku awe nos ta ruman,                            That today we are brothers and sisters
pero awó nos tur a bira katibu di shon Dios.    But now we are the slaves of Master God
Laga nos gradisi ma na bon Dios                 Let us say grace, but to the good Lord for heav-
pa stelu 1 su bondat.”                          en and its goodness.


The influence of the Catholic Church is also evident in the following song:

Ban pidi Dios na rudia abou                    Let us ask God on our bare knees
ku su santu deboshon                           with our holy devotion
awor nos ta liber di tur shon                  now that we are free from all masters
liber di tur nashon                            free of all nation
katibu di rei.”                                slaves of the King


The first of July was indelibly printed in the Afro-Curagaoans’ memory. Up until the twen-
tieth century this date served as a reference point from which people deduced their birth-
day. The vicar Krugers wrote about how people at the first census in 1933, who did not
remember their date of birth, would come to him for information and refer to the date of
emancipation in order to calculate their age (Krugers 1934:59).



Conclusion

 To conclude, both those with power and those without had their own perceptions of what
 emancipation would entail. Slave-owners, through formal institutions, voiced their
 concerns. To them, abolition implied giving the slaves personal autonomy and independ-
 ence, thus placing them beyond their control. Even though they could not guarantee suf-
 ficient work for the freed, the former owners wanted a work force available as and when
needed.
     It is also clear that the Roman Catholic Church played an intermediate role in the way
freedom was perceived by the slaves. The Church acknowledged the atrocities of slavery
and portrayed freedom as the complete opposite. Freedom represented happiness, a lack
of coerced labour. Yet the Church underlined the need to install an intrinsic work ethic
alongside other virtues, such as abiding by the law and maintaining an orderly family life.
It was also stressed to the manumitted former slaves that hatred and revenge should not
be harboured or enacted on those who had ill-treated them. This influenced the way for-
mer slaves perceived freedom. To the Church freedom would bring the possibilities for a
greater involvement in the moral uplifting of the former enslaved. They nevertheless had
their own conceptions of what freedom offered, as is recorded in oral history.
     For those emancipated, freedom had yet another, deep-rooted meaning. This was
manifested in their songs sung on Emancipation day, some of which were tambu songs.
The choice for tambú was a manifestation of their autonomy as they brought to the fore
their own expression of freedom, in a form which was previously prohibited by State and
Church. These songs show what freedom meant to them, with the lyrics expressing joy


                                                                                            WS)
regarding the end of physical punishments for the slightest transgression. Above all it
meant for them the hope of being able to choose the work, and indeed the life, they desi-
red.




Notes

1      Discussions among slave-owners on Curacao centered on the belief that black slaves, once free,
       would not hold a realistic view on what freedom would entail. According to Mintz and Price this
       feeling among slave-owners throughout the Americas was based on the assumption that with
       freedom the ‘enslaved would relapse into their natural state’ (1992:250).
2      NA, Ministerie van Koloniën, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6734, 31-12-1862/906. Slave-owners saw this
       type of conduct as a confirmation of their belief that blacks were naturally indolent and would
       work only under the firm direction of whites (Berlin and Morgan 1993:61).
3      Kerkelijke Courant, no. 368, vol. 30, 16-1-1864; Amigoe, 1-7-1863.
       Idem.
5      Apparently Euwens presented this document to the library. In the accompanying letter the priest
       made assurances that this poem was made by a man emancipated on 1 July 1863. This poem is
       in the original orthography of 1863. The full title is ‘Cantica pa celebrasjoon di e gran dia di
       libertat (Song of the celebration of the great day of freedom) Bibliotheek Universiteit van de
       Nederlandse Antillen.
6      Koloniaal Verslag 1855, zitting 1857-1858.
7      Koloniaal Verslag 1856, zitting 1858-1859.
8 _Dividivi (Caesalpinia coriaria); tannin is extracted from the pods.
9 Interview Amanda Manuela Fabian (born 1889), Allen, 9-4-1989 (NatAr).
10 KITLV, Koloniale Verslagen 1855, zitting 1857-1858.
11 Kerkelijke Courant, no. 291, vol. 28, 26-7-1862.
12 NatAr, Inventaris van het archief van het Gouvernementssecretarie, Ingekomen stukken, Buiten-
   districten Curagao 1862, inv. no. 3686, 31-10-1862/238.
13 Interview with a woman born in 1916 (she did not want her name stated), Allen, March 2001
   (NatAr).
14 Interview Virginia Meulens (born 1869 in Otrobanda), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collec-
   tion, T 440, NatAr).
15 Interview Mervelita Comenencia (born 1903), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T
   611, NatAr).
16 Rosalia 1997:99.
17 It is unclear what the informant meant with the term ‘queen’ as there was a king reigning in the
   Netherlands at that moment.
18 Interview Shon Pa di Zegu (born 1899), Brenneker/Juliana, 1972 (T 24, Fundashon Biblioteka
   Públiko Kòrsou).
19 Interview Martina Felipe (born 1893), Allen, 13-1-1983 (NatAr).
20 See also interview Henriqueta Garcia (born 1898), Brenneker/Juliana, June 1980 (Zikinzá-col-
   lection, T 75, NatAr), in which the woman relates how emancipation is due to the intermedia-
   tion of Queen Victoria, the mother of Wilhelmina.
21 Interview Lucia Hato (born 1886), 1959 (T 881); Cai Maduro (date of birth not registered), 1958
   (T 705); Herman Peloso (born 1882), 1959 (Brenneker/Juliana, T 721, Zikinzá-collection,
   NatAr).
22     Martinus 1997:258.
   EEn                                                   7                        ‘
23° Ka’ in Caboverdian means a negation of something, while ‘mais’ means more. ‘Djuku,, compara-



116
     ble to jugo’ in Portuguese, means submission. ‘Kaiman djuku, djuku kaiman’ then translates as
     ‘no more submission, submission no more’ (Martinus 1997:258).
24   On the day of freedom, Virginia Meulens’ (Ma Djini) mother was not a slave and was living in
     town. Ma Djini strongly emphasized the free status of her mother during the interview, thus
     showing that she wanted to disassociate herself from slavery. The fact, however, that her mother
     could remember two of these songs may indicate some ties with recently freed people. Interview
     Virginia Meulens (born 1869 in Otrobanda), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 440,
     NatAr).
25   Interview Ma Chichi (born 1853), Brenneker/Juliana, 1958 (Zikinzá-collection, T 607, NatAr).
26   Idem.
PH   Interview Pa Allee (born 1899), Brenneker/Juliana, 1958 (T 606); Marvelita Comenencia (born
     1903), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 611, NatAr). See also Robertico (Lai) Feli-
     cia (born 1900), Brenneker/Juliana, 6-11-1986 (T 120, Fundashon Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
   See also Rosalia 1997:101.
28 Interview Cola Susana (born 1915), project Etnomusicologie/
                                                           Allen and Gansemans, 15-5-1983,
     NatAr.
29   Interview Robertico (Lai) Felicia (born 1900), Brenneker/Juliana, 6-11-1986 (T 120, Fundashon
     Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
30 Idem.
Sil Interview Francisco Conquet (born 1882), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 656,
     NatAr).
32   Interview Wawa Willems      (born 1875), Brenneker/Juliana,    1960 (Zikinzá-collection, T 435,
     NatAr).
33   Interview Eligio Maduro     (born 1886), Brenneker/Juliana,    1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 730,
     NatAr).
34   Interview Wawa    Willems   (born 1875), Brenneker/Juliana,    1960 (Zikinzá-collection, T 435,
     NatAr).




                                                                                                   17,
CHAPTER V
The Role of the State and the
Plantation Owners after Emancipation



Introduction

Many studies have considered emancipation as simply an end to coerced labour. Under
slavery the discipline of the enslaved was left to the discretion of their masters. With eman-
cipation, this legal authority to control the activities, and even lives, of people was effec-
tively removed. Former slaves became subject to State regulations, with the protection this
afforded — they were now ‘equal’ citizens within society. Consequently, the responsibility
for punishment, in the event of a breach of the law, passed into the hands of State appoint-
ed authorities.
    However, the real nature of freedom is obscured if we see it solely in terms of legality
and fail to examine it as a process involving a series of complex interactions between for-
mer slaves, former masters and several other institutions (Scott 1987:565). Freedom has
indeed necessitated the alteration of many existing rules to accommodate this change in
social positions. This, in reality, was more complicated than just introducing laws and reg-
ulations for a society with wide social inequalities. The perceptions and actions of indi-
viduals do not automatically change overnight solely due to the introduction of new laws.
    As the economic historian Stanley L. Engerman (1992:53) states, in the Caribbean the
abolition of slavery entailed dramatic legal effects. Nevertheless, aspects such as policy and
the locus of political, social and economic power in society continued in place. The high-
er class remained predominantly white and continued to lead the economic, political and
cultural spheres in society, while most blacks remained subjected — even though no longer
enslaved. In addition to this race factor, when former slaves joined the lower classes, the
perception the upper and middle classes held of this group influenced the way emancipa-
tion evolved socially (Engerman 1992:53). In the Caribbean, the abolition of slavery thus
basically redefined the legal parameters within which social interaction between people of
unequal status, based on racial differences, could take place. The State played a prominent
and instrumental role in shaping the legal framework of social relations. In most cases
State intervention served to maintain the extant socio-racial hierarchy. In this Chapter I
will focus on the manner in which this occurred within Cura¢aoan society.
    In the entire Caribbean, the State introduced laws aimed at ordering the lives of those
acquiring citizenship. This group joined the previously manumitted. Plantation owners
feared a scarcity of labour following emancipation. They believed that as a consequence of
these changes, workers would leave the plantations in search of better prospects. Due to
this expectation, in the British Caribbean as well as in the Dutch colony of Suriname, a


                                                                                           119
period of apprenticeship was introduced and in many cases contract labourers were
employed from as far afield as British India, Java and China.
    On Curacao, where the economy was not based on plantation revenue, concerns
regarding labour following emancipation were of a different nature. Curacao’s labour sur-
plus, coupled with a limited amount of fertile land and the general perception of blacks
being undisciplined, induced the State to become a prime instrument in maintaining work
discipline. The new laws were dominated by the racist ideas of the time, which assumed
that former slaves would be unable to cope with their new status. As I will demonstrate,
this group had to constantly struggle against these preconceptions in developing their own
identity.
    Another factor complicating integration was the composition of the Cura¢aoan elite:
this was not a homogeneous group but encompassed different interest groups, including
many from the field of commerce. This was largely due to fact that the plantations con-
tributed little to the island economy (Rupert 1999:128, 213). Consequently, post-emanci-
pation politics on the island were not solely concerned with the interests of the plantation
owners, but were to a greater extent shaped by those of the other elite groups. This was
contrary to the norm in the Caribbean. I will also examine how this has affected the intro-
duction and implementation of rules and laws pertaining to those emancipated.
     The purpose of this Chapter is to study the role the State played in determining the
life pattern of the freed Afro-Curagaoans. I will give an overview of how the State used
laws, regulations and policies to control aspects of their lives in terms of economy, rela-
tionships, religion and recreation. Finally, I will examine the way in which State and peo-
ple interacted, and I will analyse how Afro-Curacaoans responded to these specific forms
of control.



Law and Order on Curacao:           A New Phase
In the year of emancipation, governmental responsibility lay in the hands of a governor,
who held legislative, executive and juridical powers. He was assisted by a Colonial Council
comprised of plantation owners and merchants. In the months leading up to emancipa-
tion, the State introduced four laws aimed at giving structure to the lives of those to‘ be
freed. They came into effect on 1 July 1863. Similar laws were already in existence and dealt
with the group previously manumitted. Now, with impending freedom, these laws were
expanded to encompass the new situation.
    With the ending of the traditional forms of social control exercised by the plantation
owners, members of the upper class were convinced that Afro-Curacaoans would not
know how to behave with the newly acquired freedom and feared a deterioration of their
behaviour. Those living in the outer districts in particular, expressed their concerns on this
issue and were generally more resistant to emancipation.
    Thus, with slavery at an end, responsibility for maintaining order among the Afro-
Curagaoans lay in the hands of the colonial State. The content of the new laws expressed
the concerns of the upper class. Government expenditure dramatically increased as a result
of the implementation of new laws. In addition to the State having to compensate the


120
slave-owners for the loss of their property, much of the colonial budget was swallowed up
by policing and juridical matters. Part of the budget also went to improving the social con-
ditions of the district masters, whose responsibilities were broadened. Within the new
structure they were paid a salary and given a house; for this purpose the government pur-
chased plantation houses. The expenses incurred, particularly on Curacao, led to heated
discussions in the House of Commons on whether Dutch involvement with the islands
should continue at all (Renkema 1976).
    The main areas of State intervention were in labour, public order and security. One of
the new laws dealt with the island’s division into five districts.’ Another law which direct-
ly influenced the lives of Afro-Cura¢aoans pertained to the transportation of animals,
wood, charcoal and agricultural products on the public roads and was aimed at prevent-
ing the theft of these products.* The law which dealt with hiring domestic servants, work-
ers and labourers was enforced in order to safeguard the availability of certain groups of
workers when needed.’ A law preventing idleness and vagrancy was instituted as well.’



The Vagrancy Law and its Effect on Labour Discipline
Oostindie (1997:67) concludes that from a colonial perspective, the principal problem at
emancipation was how to secure work for the newly freed. Indeed, the State Commission
preparing for emancipation had foreseen that unemployment would become a problem,
particularly in the countryside. As agriculture was rarely profitable, emancipation present-
ed the prospect of immediate impoverishment. Slaves in the countryside mainly did sea-
sonal work: on average slaves spent six months of the year working on the plantation, while
during quiet times a variety of jobs outside the plantation were undertaken. As most
labour opportunities were in the sector of commerce in town, some would be hired out to
work there as bricklayers, carpenters, blacksmiths, stevedores, servants, seamstresses and
washerwomen. Or they were employed in the craft related industries in town, or as sailors
on vessels which plied the region. Some of the slaves manumitted before 1863 continued
to work in the fields, or they undertook activities on the plantations relating to export,
such as collecting seeds from the dividivi trees and keeping livestock (Rupert 1999:128,
213). It is also recorded that a large number became destitute.
     It was highly unlikely that after emancipation, plantation owners would hire workers just
for the sake of keeping them busy. They were more likely to hire labour as and when need-
ed (Staatscommissie 1856:228). In preparation for emancipation, the State made some
attempts to provide employment for the soon to be freed by creating work on the govern-
ment plantations.’ However, the Dutch colonial government did not consider it its duty to
provide the former slaves with work. This was openly stated in a letter by the governor to
the administrator of the island of St. Eustatius, who had requested the sum of 800 guilders
in order to create work for former slaves on the island.”
     As projected, the availability of work remained limited and scarce after emancipation.
A major problem facing the government was thus how to enforce labour discipline within
a system with a large surplus of workers, coupled with the fact that when labour opportu-
nities did present themselves, they were only on a short-term basis. Despite there being few


                                                                                          121
job opportunities, planters still needed a disciplined and dependable work force, as was the
case in other plantation societies (Foner 1983:10).
     This anxiety was only increased by the notion that blacks lacked a good work ethic and
self-discipline. The question ‘will the free Afro-Curagaoan be willing to work after the abo-
lition of slavery?’ was a persistent one. A high ranking military officer interviewed by the
Commission preparing for freedom emphasized this concern as he described his views on
the lack of discipline amongst blacks. He stated that he had ‘commanded the last reserve
of soldiers, in which there are many freed blacks. It takes great effort to instill discipline in
these men? According to him, this attitude was based on ‘the notion of the Negro that (...)
I must become free, not where will I work and how will I take care of myself’ (Staatscom-
missie 1856:243). The belief that blacks were lazy and unambitious would persist after
emancipation. In 1868 A.D. van der Gon Netscher, a board member of the ‘Koninklijk
Instituut voor de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië’ (KITLV), even
suggested that convicts from the Netherlands should, as a way of serving their time, be
sent to Curacao and be put to the heavy and more arduous work formerly done by slaves,
such as working on the salt-pans, burning chalk, baking tiles and stones, and chopping
wood (1868:466). According to him, the knife would cut both ways: the motherland
would be free of its criminals, while the newly emancipated in particular would be taught
and given an example of European knowledge, will-power and diligence. In making this
suggestion, van der Gon Netscher ignored the fact that often this kind of work was not
available on the island. Indolence and idleness were seen as consequences of the lack of
discipline among the black population and were cited as a reason for criminal activity
such as theft. This rapidly became an issue of great concern for both the elite and the
State, as they sought ways to control and eradicate the problem (van der Lee 1998:6).
Three years after emancipation, a district master wrote in a letter to the governor that ‘the
best way of inducing civil behaviour among the working class is to suppress laziness and
theft with all force.’
    The white elite feared that once the enslaved became free, they would leave the planta-
tions, go wandering from place to place and steal as they went. Criminalizing vagrancy was
then considered the best way of enforcing a work discipline.“ In this way the State tried to
establish an element of control over the former slaves who, it was considered, would mis-
interpret freedom as unlimited liberty and independence. In addition, it was thought that
these measures would help to regulate the labour supply in a fluctuating economy.
     The new law defined a vagrant as someone lacking permanent accommodation and suf-
ficient means of support.’ Those falling foul of the vagrancy law were usually poor, able-
bodied and unemployed; they tended to wander, and thus were prone to stealing in order to
keep themselves alive. Beggars, except those requiring special care, such as the old and the
handicapped, were not exempt. Every year the district commissioners had to report to the
Procurator of the King the names of those who were blind, crippled, paralyzed or old and
therefore unable to support themselves. The term ‘vagrant’ included those encountered wan-
dering at night in gardens, corrals, galleries, vessels and public places without permission.
     The application of the law against idleness also being applied to nightly activities was
intended to control theft. Plantation owners took practical measures and asked for per-
mission to fence their land." It was known for them to buy a piece of public land from the


 12
 government in order to keep members of the working class at a distance." From emanci-
 pation into the twentieth century, planters would continually accuse the black population
 of theft and refer to their neighbourhoods as ‘thieves’ dens.”
     Vagrants were sentenced to hard labour by the government in the form of building and
maintaining public property or infrastructure which was contracted out to private com-
panies.'’ The money earned by these prisoners went towards their subsistence and the pay-
ment of their fines (Onrust 1998). Simple imprisonment, it was thought, would not be
experienced as a punishment by blacks as they were considered lazy by nature — therefore
forced labour would be a fitting punishment (Bossers 2000:250). Not only were the
vagrants themselves punished, but also family and friends who aided them.
     The vagrancy law made no distinction between the sexes. However, the State, in its
attempt to instill a labour discipline, made a distinction between minors and adults.
Vagrants yet to reach the age of sixteen could be placed at the disposal of the Curacaoan
police. They could also be incarcerated for up to eight days, after which they would be
returned to their parents or guardians; measures were introduced to provide training, edu-
cation and support.“ Some parents utilized the vagrancy law in order to discipline their
children. Such was the case of Maria Louiza Hart, who did not know what to do with her 18
year old son, as he was a thief and a vagrant. She therefore petitioned the district master to
place him in permanent service. She was successful and as a result her son was sent to work
on a plantation, where he received food, clothing and accommodation and was above all
controlled.”
     The vagrancy law required the newly freed to carry an emancipation letter, otherwise
they faced prosecution. The people who lived on the infertile plots called the sabana were
particularly likely to be prosecuted. They were believed to set a bad example to their own
children, thus inducing them to become idle and therefore vagrants. Their population
increase troubled the white elite, who voiced dissatisfaction concerning the large number of
animals they kept and the damage this caused to their lands. The elite complained that these
blacks were lazy and shifty and that they chose to live on infertile land, making survival pos-
sible only by stealing from the plantations. The plantation owners viewed them as a men-
ACER.
    In the course of time, the word ‘vagabond’ — in Papiamentu ‘bagamundu’ — was used as
a term of abuse directed at both men and women. People used the term to signify worth-
lessness and disorderliness. A male who was called a ‘bagamundu’ was a troublemaker,
someone not conforming to the social norms. However, people generally considered a
female vagrant to be the most despicable and immoral of all creatures. Women accused of
being a ‘bagamundu’ considered this very offensive and sometimes took the accuser to
court. For example, a 48 year old straw hat maker named Philip was taken to court by a
woman named Maximiliana after he had verbally insulted her in public. He had called her
a stinking ‘negress, a whore and a vagrant’ who had roamed about and had had so many
men that her ‘lower part had become rotten.” In another case a 25 year old washerwoman
was called ‘the biggest whore and vagrant who has ever existed, and a thief who has even
stolen a golden earring from the ear of a child."




                                                                                           125
Working with Contracts
The plantation owners made contracts with some labourers. These could be made orally
in the presence of a district master, who recorded the duration, the amount and the pay-
ment deadline. In the case of a dispute arising, the word of the district master was given
precedence. Should the labourer under contract be absent from work without a legitimate
reason, according to the district master he would forfeit his wages and any other benefit he
may have been entitled to. But the contracts also protected the interests of the employed.
If the plantation owner decided to terminate the contract he was obliged to compensate
him for the time worked.”
     However, these contracts proved largely ineffective. The former slaves either did not
show any willingness to enter into contracts or, if they did, were more disposed to break-
ing them rather than keeping them. The itinerant nature of the labour force remained
problematic. A clear example of this is shown in the following case brought against a shep-
herd named Telly. The district master complained that this shepherd did not meet his obli-
gations and that he left the herd unattended. He accused him of not wanting to work, even
though the work was light. In addition, the shepherd was cared for, clothed and treated
well. In his letter to the Attorney General, the district master addressed the issue of curb-
ing idleness and wanted the shepherd to be made ‘an example of.” The family also suffered
the consequences: in the following year the shepherd’s mother was removed from the gov-
ernment land, being accused of allowing her son to become idle and unruly.”
     Former slaves would leave the plantations as soon as they became aware of better oppor-
tunities in town. Their possibility of moving to town became a test of the reality of freedom.
In a letter dated 6 January 1864, the owner of the plantation San Sebastiaan stated that many
former slaves had left for town and that they no longer wanted to work on his plantation.
This type of complaint was common.” The district masters continuously complained that
the law of 16 January 1863 (PB 1863/116), regarding the employment of servants, was inad-
equate and left them powerless to deal with those who were not diligent in their duties.”
     After emancipation it took some time to find viable methods of labour control and to
re-establish a pattern in the working relationship. An example of this is the case of Martis
Ignacio. He was detained temporarily after having been accused by the planter of stealing
coals from his plantation. Ignacio was acquitted by the court, which considered his felony
a breach of contract rather than a criminal act. The discussion revolved around whether a
worker living on the plantation who sold the charcoal burned from plantation-wood, had
stolen or had broken his contract. The plantation owner considered it theft, but the judge
saw it as a breach of contract and even stated that the owner had the right of possession of
the wood and had to pay the workers a salary to burn the wood.
     Soon after emancipation some plantations owners made new petitions to make break-
ing a contract a criminal offence; this would force labourers to complete the terms of their
contract.” They demanded punishment ranging from fines to imprisonment for those
who broke their work agreements. These complaints were heeded and the law was extend-
ed in 1865.”
      This law clearly laid down the penalties should a contract be broken (PB 1865/12). A
fisherman named Martijn Dammers, aged 38, was penalized under this law for not
                                                                               com-
plying with his agreement.” The law was also used to prosecute Andries Doran, who
                                                                                          had


124
 broken his contract with the plantation owner. Along with his family he left to live with his
 father Jose Doran on a savanna. In order to set a precedence the father was also punished
 for employing his son and allowing him to live with him.”
     There was close co-operation between the State and the plantation owners on this issue
 of land use. The regulation of 23 August 1864/554 stated that individuals who already pos-
 sessed a piece of land on a plantation and who could provide a living for themselves and
 for their family, would not be able to rent a piece of government land. When people
 requested a piece of land from the government, outside the plantation where they lived
 and worked, the plantation owners in question would sometimes, through various means,
block the departure of the worker — this would usually occur if the individual was a par-
 ticularly valued worker. These people were also refused a piece of land by applying the
same regulation. Those who asked for permission were deemed wanting to ‘act on one’s
own or ‘trying to become independent’. Of those who did not fall into this category, and
who had requested a piece of land from the district master, the latter inquired whether the
plantation owners in the surrounding area had any objections. This also applied to those
who asked for a piece of land to keep animals on. Any objection on the part of the planta-
tion owners would result in the petitioner failing to receive the piece of land. They were
hence forced to remain on the plantations.
     A piece of land could also be refused if situated too close to a plantation. Through the
distribution of land the government tried to eradicate what it considered improper behav-
iour. Land could be refused if the conduct of the applicant was in doubt. When individu-
als requested a piece of land, the district master would gather information on their char-
acter and would then advice the governor of their suitability. As the plantation owners
were consulted on this matter, they continued to have influence on whether a person
would receive a piece of land in the neighbourhood of their plantation. The district mas-
ter, in making his assessment, considered a number of factors: was the applicant industri-
ous, hard-working, motivated and respectful of authority? Idleness was a criterion for
being refused land.” Impertinence was another criterion. A person could have been
refused a piece of land for merely answering back to a planter on one occasion. People who
worked in town were automatically refused a piece, simply because they lived in town and
their behaviour was often unknown to the district master, making it difficult for him to
assess the person’s suitability.”
     Within the contract of those who did receive government land were detailed conditions
which they had to adhere to. As blacks were believed to be of an explosive character and
easily disposed to violence, it was stated that they were not allowed to sell liquor or hold a
tambú feast on their land.’ People would be evicted from government land when they
broke the contract.



Policing in Post-Emancipation Society

In order to exercise social control, the island was decentralized into five districts instead of
three, as was the case before emancipation. These comprised four rural districts and one
urban district. It is not surprising that the rural areas saw a greater increase in policing


                                                                                            125
                                                                                          where
than the urban district. It is here that the greater part of enslaved were freed, and
the traditional forms of social  control no  longer  existed. In the rural areas the free  black
population doubled at emancipation.
     A master, or ‘commissioner’, was placed at the head of each district, and was responsi-
ble for its control and administration. The rural commissioners had broader responsibili-
ties than their urban counterpart. It was expected that the commissioners in the outer dis-
tricts would exercise stricter control over the people. They had to patrol their district
weekly and the outlying parts once a month.
     One aspect of this was to communicate with those people wishing to discuss issues or
settle disagreements. The district master would also determine who was in need of social
aid. However, given the distance to these outlying districts and the state of the roads, the
fulfillment of these tasks proved arduous, as was evident in their reports. Furthermore, the
commissioner was also responsible for the implementation of regulations relating to agri-
culture, gardening, forestry, animal husbandry and water supply. For example, he was
required to police the harvest celebrations. As stated before, the harvesting of maize was
sometimes celebrated in the form of seú — which could become a public activity, with
many participants and onlookers.
    In the outer districts the commissioners organized the maintenance of the public infra-
structure and properties, and supervised the public roads (PB 1863/19). Specific to the
rural districts was the role of assistant officer in the registration office. The commissioner
registered the births and deaths within his district and legalized marriages. Every year he
had to report on and evaluate the affairs of his district. Aside from these administrative
matters, he was involved with police and juridical matters. He was responsible for main-
taining law and order and could administer punishment in minor civil and criminal cases.
The responsibilities of the district masters were thus complex and wide ranging. They were
crime fighters, bureaucrats, intelligence officers and social workers all at the same time.
    In addition to descent and rank, another requisite for becoming a commissioner in the
outer districts was to be familiar with both Dutch and Papiamentu. The commissioner
should be someone who ‘knew the inhabitants of the districts and talked their language’.
Those in the outer districts functioned as a communication channel between the govern-
ment, the land owners and the populace. In court cases they would collect information and
evidence regarding places and people in order to assess the validity of a case (Fliek
1969:15).
     Most of the time these district commissioners were plantation owners themselves or
were either friends or related by blood or marriage to the owners in their districts. The
State was fully aware of these relationships and in order to avoid conflict of interest it was
stated that commissioners should not own a plantation or any other business in their dis-
trict. However, some could not ignore the strong ties they had with other plantation own-
ers and in disputes regarding work and land, they were often biased (Renkema 1981a:332;
PB 1863/19).
     An example of this is illustrated in the following case, which occurred soon after eman-
cipation. The Church and State opposed each other on the issue of work: should people be
permitted to work on Sundays and holidays? In a confidential letter dated 16 July 1866 to
all district masters on the island the governor had asked whether the Catholic priests were


126
preaching in a way that could hamper the relationship between the former masters and
their servants.” It was then that the commissioner in the western part of the island at San
Sebastiaan put forward the case of Federica. She had been imprisoned for three days due
to her refusal to work on Sundays, the day of worship; she had also refused to apologize.
When confronted by the commissioner, the priest had declared that ‘he would continue to
preach that labourers and servants should not work for the planters on Sundays’. Instruct-
ed by the governor, the commissioner expressed his conviction that working on Sundays
was indispensable for the planters, as they had to take their products to town on Sunday
evenings. He also feared ‘the loss of labour control if the black population accepted these
ideas as the planters would then be without workers.”
    Conflicts between commissioners and the people within their districts were exacerbat-
ed by the dictates of the law which stipulated the fining of tresspassers for small offences
(Sjiem Fat 1986:97). A more liberal approach was deemed beneficial by P. Sassen, the
Procurator General who in 1870 recommended in a circular letter to deal with minor
infringements of the law through verbal reprimand.
    There were some district masters who sided with the black population. This was evi-
dent in the case of the master who openly wrote in 1867 that the two plantation owners
who requested to buy a piece of land from the government in order to keep blacks away
from their area, were exaggerating the ‘bad’ behaviour of the inhabitants in that neigh-
bourhood.*Another        example comes from the district commissioner J.P. Eskildsen, who
refuted the criticisms of the popular class made by the plantation owners.” Eskildsen gave
a detailed view of how the planters behaved towards the people on their plantations. In a
letter he protested against their recurring accusation that the neighbourhoods of the work-
ing class were thieves’ nests (Renkema 1981a:157).
     The district commissioners had to exercise control during a period when authority was
believed to be subjective, based on colour and race, and when laws generally reinforced this
belief. In most cases, the commissioners could assert their status due to their colour or
class. In interviews, informants born at the end of the nineteenth century respectfully
referred to them as mener. An informant would say ‘M’a pidi mener un pida tera, mean-
ing: I requested the mister a piece of land. In the following tambt song this is evident.

Mi ta bai puntra shon Meneer                      I went to ask mister
Ku por ta hustu eset                              If this is justified
Pa mi tin mi kappa                                For me to have my billy goat (sterilized)
Anto mi no tin derechi                            And I don’t have the right
Pa mi busk’é                                      To go and look for it
Telele telela”                                    Telele telela


Successive district commissioners complained about their limited powers, budgetary con-
straints and legal limitations. They would also constantly express anxiety about their low pay,
the heavy administrative workload, the lack of working material and vague and insufficient
instructions.” In an evaluation of the position of the masters in the outer districts, the histo-
rian Hamelberg compared them to the bomba. According to Hamelberg, they were given the
role of police superintendent, paid a subsistence salary, and above all were overworked.”


                                                                                              127
                                                                                      Scott
The former enslaved expressed their hostility towards such district masters in what
                                                        offensive behaviour of the district
calls the hidden transcripts. There are cases where the
commissioners became the topic of the day for the popular class. The following story
comes from an interview Juliana conducted with people from Banda Riba, in which the
name Janchi Benta was often mentioned. Janchi played an instrument called the benta”
and during gatherings he sang songs relating to topical issues. Because of his ability to
function as a mouthpiece for the community by using the benta, he was given the
nickname Janchi Benta. The following song recalled by an informant of Juliana, was one
he played. The lyrics concern a district master who sent policemen to search for stolen
goats, while he himself sent people out to steal for him. Janchi Benta saw this and made a
song, highlighting the irony of the situation.

Mener de Riter di Jansofat                        Mister de Riter of Jansofat
Mener de Riter ta ladron                          Mister de Riter is a thief
Mener de Riter di Jansofat                        Mister de Riter of Jansofat
Ata Mener ta kome bestia                          Look at how the mister eats animals
Mener de Riter di Jansofat                        Mister de Riter of Jansofat
Mener de Riter ta ladron”                         Mister de Riter is a thief


Janchi Benta was sent to prison. According to written documents he was accused of organ-
izing gatherings and illegally selling alcohol in the neighbourhood, whereas people
claimed it was because of this song that he was imprisoned.”

In the beginning of the twentieth century the authority of the district masters became
questioned more openly by the general public. People resisted their power by making use
of the legal system now open to them. For example, in 1902 Lambertus Koeiman and
Alexander Nijs went directly to the Procurator General, complaining that they had polite-
ly requested the district master several times for a piece of land, but each time they had
been sent home empty-handed.” The aforementioned Eduardo Tokaai proudly narrated
how he had been able to receive his piece of land in the 1920s, despite the obstacles placed
in his path by the district master who had close ties with the plantation owners.

E homber ku bo ta bai pidi un pida tera,          The man to whom you have to go for a piece of
nan(shonnan) ta stop e. No no no. Mi ta bai       land, they (the plantation owners) are going to
kontabo kon mi a hafia e pida tera aki. Mi        stop him. No, no, no. I will tell you how I got
tabata traha kas na Skalo.                        this piece of land: I was building houses at
                                                  Scharloo.
Kas grandi, bai te Pietermaai. Mi tabata traha    Big house, going all the way to Pietermaai.
komo peon pa un hende di Banda Bou. Un sier-      Well, I worked as an unskilled labourer for
to hende, e persona ku nos tabata traha p’e, a    someone from Banda Bou. A certain person, the
bini sinta interim pa 4 luna na lugá di e dis-    man we were working for, came to sit interim
trictmeester, ku a bai.                           for some four months in place of the district
                                                  commusstoner, who had left.
Interim ta nifiká te ora e mener bini bèk. Anto    ‘Interim’ means until the gentleman came
ma kont’é kuantu problema nos tin pa hafia un     back. And I told him how much trouble we had


 128
pida di tera. E interim a bisa nos: Ahan si, bo no    to get a piece of land. The interim district mas-
ta hafia tera, paso shonnan ta manda koko lep-        ter said to me: Oh yes, you all don’t get any
lap pa mener, i e ta bebe awa di leplap i ultra-     land because the land owners send young
ha boso.                                             coconuts for the gentleman; they drink coconut
                                                     water and oppress you.
E ora ei el a puntrami: ‘Kuantu di boso ta buska      Then he asked me: ‘How many ofyou are look-
tera? Buska nomber di kuater of sinku amigu di       ing for land? Find the names of at least four or
boso, trese e nombernan p’ami i bo ta hana           five friends of yours, bring them to me and you
tera.’                                               will get land.’
Mi a trese e papel. Nos a hana e tera (infor-        I brought the paper. We got land (the infor-
mante ta klap den su man). E mesun dia. Nos          mant claps his hands). The same day. We all got
tur a hana tera. Ta e interim a duna nos e. No       land. It was the interim district master who
e mener ku ta bebe awa di koko leplap ku e           gave it to us. Not the gentleman who drinks
dofionan di kunuku.     Ora bo bai buska tera,       coconut water together with the land owners.
shon ta bisa: No dur’é tera.                          When you go and ask for a piece of land, the
                                                     land owner would say: ‘Don’t give him land.
Naturalmente mener no ta bisabo ku ta shon a         Of course, the district master would not say
bis’é esei. Despues ku nos tur a hana nos tera,      that the land owner said that. After we got our
shon a keda nanishi largu.(Tokaai ta traha           land, the land owner’s nose remained long (the
nanishi largu ku su dedenan).*                       informant makes a long nose with hisfingers).

In complying with the demands of the planter class, civil police was expanded at the time
of emancipation.“ Policing in post-emancipation Curacaoan society was conducted in a
similar way to other Caribbean societies, with more emphasis on the prevention of civil
disturbance than on the prevention of crime (Richards 1993:1). Plantation owners com-
plained to the district masters and they in turn complained to the governor that the police
force was too small. This argument was often used to restrict large formations of ‘negro
huts’ in a district. It was argued that the existing number of policemen was insufficient to
adequately fight the problems relating to the illegal trade in liquor, stolen goods and other
forms of disorderly behaviour.”
    The local population called the military police mareshosé.” They had a lower social sta-
tus than the white planter class. Some did not know the local language and would keep
their distance, rarely forming relations with the local population. However, over time
members of the corps would become more connected with the black lower class and affairs
and marriages were not unknown.” This pattern already existed before emancipation (van
Dissel 1857:114). This presented a problem for the colonial government. Van der Gon
Netscher vilified these military policemen for such actions. One reason for this was that
most of these policemen were already at an old age when they started a family, so that
when they died, their young widows became impoverished and had to appeal for govern-
ment aid (1868:466). Indirectly, this type of relationship between whites and blacks also
meant a break-down in the system ideally characterized by separation between the sexes.
    Below the military police were the police patrol men, with less authority. Most of them
belonged to the black lower class. From the start of emancipation attempts were made to
recruit policemen from the districts. In a note to the commissioner of the third district, the
governor requested that:



                                                                                                   129
      In the interest of law and order, it is desirable to select capable persons who live in the
      negro villages and in the inhabited part of the outer districts, who will be given the
      responsibility to maintain peace and order.”

This was an attempt to create ties between the police system and the people in the com-
munities. But many were opposed to this idea, based on the racial stereotype that ‘blacks
could not exercise authority over their own people’ (Koloniale Verslagen 1870). In his
response to the governor the district commissioner stated: “There is a propensity among
blacks for violence and a lack of respect for authority.” Others thought that their being
part of the black population hindered them from behaving impartially. One district mas-
ter dismissed his black watchman as he ‘behaved as though a family member of the people
he dealt with’: theyshould be integrated but remain impartial. The colonial reports often
complained that it was very difficult to find suitable patrol officers (Koloniale Verslagen
1875). Those appointed found themselves constantly fighting against the prejudices of the
district commissioner, who often claimed that they were unsuited for the job.
    The conditions of employment were generally unfavourable. For example, they had to
be at the disposal of the service at all times. They also had to own a means of transport.
On top of that, they were in temporary service and did not have the position of civil ser-
vants; they could not claim a pension and could be dismissed at any time.”
     The lack of integration of the military police into the communities created problems.
There is evidence that they asserted their power in an aggressive way when dealing with the
lower class. In some cases people would react to this by resisting arrest, but this would
often lead to further maltreatment. As people used songs to express resistance, the military
police also became the subject of songs, like the one recorded below: ‘Ai bin dal mi, ku bo
por!’ (Come and hit me if you dare).

Bin dal mi, ku bo por                                Come and hit me ifyou dare
Bin dal mi                                           Come and hit me
Pa mi bolbe dal bo                                   I will hit you back
Bin dal mi mareshosé                                 Come and hit me, military police
Bin dal mi”                                          Come and hit me

The authority of the military police was undermined by the fact that they did not always
set a good example themselves. Some drank excessively.» For example, Pieternella and
Constantien Lourens complained about Billiet, a military policeman who under the influ-
ence of alcohol had pulled up the dress of their seventeen year old daughter Melanie, and
who had also given her a cuff on the ear. He was subsequently sent to jail.” In another case,
the district master was called in frequently during the disputes between Petroneeltje and
her husband: a police sergeant who, while drunk, would maltreat his wife and children.”
Others were reported to the district masters for drinking in public places while on duty.
Their punishment was likely to be dismissal or reduction in rank.”
    In order to improve its functioning and image in the community, in 1872 the military
force was reorganized. The colonial report of the following year already concluded that an
improvement in conduct by policemen was apparent. They attributed this to the increase


130
in salary, by which they could attract men more suited to the profession (Koloniale
Verslagen 1873). In the course of time, the government would interfere in the private lives
of the policemen in order to increase their respectability within the community and
improve their image. For example, married policemen who were caught having an affair
were transferred to another station on the island.” This effort was acknowledged by the
Roman Catholic Church. In an article in La Cruz of 14 August 1918, concerning the reor-
ganization of the police force, the author wrote:

    Luckily they have reorganized the police force. Military police are to be replaced by
    civilians. There ts the prospect ofgreat change and improvement if they choose compe-
    tent people to become policemen, decent people, and respectable people from good fam-
    ilies. One of the requirements for becoming a good policeman is abstinence from alco-
    hol. The government should introduce a law punishing those who sell alcohol to
    policemen, as this is done in the United States.

The Church on Curagao expected the State to judge people using the same criteria it did.
As will be clear from Chapter VI, the clergy mainly emphasized respectability. This referred
both to actual behaviour and to family roots. Thus individuals coming from a ‘good fam-
ily, that is not born out of wedlock, were deemed to be more trustworthy. One month later
the issue of respectability was once again mentioned in the same newspaper.

    Now we have a civilian police force, which everybody prefers to the military police.
    People say that the civilian force is less rough and that they know how to behave in
    Curacao. Let us see how things will develop now. If the police will conduct themselves
    well, they will give a good example of order and discipline, if they will not talk too loud,
    use foul language, will not drink and laugh with suspicious women, then Curacao will
    develop through this change.”

The following lyrics were sung when the police wanted to stop a tambú gathering. It
demonstrates that such high expectations were not always met and that it was necessary
for the government to introduce this measure.

Brigadir de Ruyter ta mi mari                      Bregadir de Ruyter is my boyfriend
Mi tin derecho di balia barf”                      I have the right to dance the drum


The notion of respectability was manifest in the policemen’s appearance, with special
attention being paid to their dress code. They would be remembered by most people due
to their uniform. An interviewee born in 1910 recalled her father, who was a policeman
before working for the mining company.

E tabata un homber hóben ora e tabata traha         He was young when he was a policeman. There
komo polis. Ei na Roi Canario, tabata hopi          at Roi Canario, there were woods with very
mondi ku palu di mangel. Ora un hende hoga          many mangrove bushes. When someone
aya na Roi Canario, hopi biaha hende ta hoga        drowned there in Roi Canario, people would


                                                                                                   131
den e awa den e mondinan ei, e mester a bai     _ often drown in the water in those bushes, he
den pa saka e kurpa sin bida for di awa. No ta   had to go in and take the corpse from the water.
manera awor aki. Semper e mester ta limpii       It is not like now. He always had to go very
bon bistí. Tambe ora e mester saka un kadaver    clean and decently dressed. Even when he had
for di awa. Mi mama ta rabia ie ta bisa: dikon _ to take a corpse out of the water. My mother
mi mester laba i guma bo pananan djis pa bo      __used to get very angry about it and she would
drenta awa i saka un kurpa   sin bida.”          say:  why should I wash and starch your clothes
                                                just for you to go inside the water and take out
                                                 a corpse.


Brenneker notes that until the 1940s Afro-Curacaoan men were not eager to join the police
force, based on the assumption that one ‘had to use violence against your own people’
(1986:249). In this connection, Sythoff’s observation still holds true. He wrote that ‘police-
men were despised by the people’, to the extent that ‘blacks who stand close to them were
repudiated by their own families’ (1857:114).




Land Resources

Jeanne Besson has stated that planters in the Caribbean were generally against the freed
population owning land, and preferred them to remain living on the plantations, thus cre-
ating dependency (2001:13). On Curagao a similar pattern was visible. After 1863 land
remained an index of influence and the plinth on which power was erected. Although it
may have been very difficult to make a plantation profitable, planters would still buy plan-
tations and those who suffered severe losses, would still hold onto them. Both Renkema
(1981a:248-52) and Hoetink (1987:152-3) agree that factors such as status played a major
role in this.
    After emancipation, land became an increasingly problematic issue for the Afro-
Curacaoans, exacerbated by the limited amount of fertile land available. Under the system
called paga tera — literally: paying for the land you live on — some former slaves would
remain living on the plantation, occupying the provision grounds as well as the house they
had had access to during slavery. In return, they were obliged to work for free for the land
owners during certain periods of the year. In many interviews this was indicated by the fol-
lowing: ‘Ora yega tempu di afia, bo mester a traha pornada pa shon’, meaning: ‘When
the time came, you had to work for nothing for the shon’
    Van der Gon Netscher defined the paga tera system as one in which ‘negroes and
coloured, among whom also the recently emancipated, lived on small plots they received
from the land owners, in return for which they were obliged to work about twelve days per
year without pay’ (1868:489). He defined the system as a favour by the plantation owners
to the former slaves.
    In 1899 the former finance administrator J.R.G. de Veer defined paga tera as a system
in which some former slaves remained on the plantation, receiving a piece of land and
other small facilities, in return for which they would work on the plantation a few days per
year (de Veer 1899:329). An informant who had lived on plantation Savaneta told Bren-
neker that they had to work twelve days per year without being paid, as compensation for


132
the land on which their house was built. These days were called the ‘dia di paga ple’ (days
to pay your duty)and were divided into six dry days, when they had to make repairs, and
six wet days when they had to plant. Only after having worked on the land of the planta-
tion owner they could work their own land.
    The paga tera system made a distinction between the way women and men would be
paid for their work.

Nos hendenan tabata traha kunuku pa shon.        We would work the land for the shon. Women
Hende muhé tabata gana 15 sén, miéntras          would get 15 cents, while men would get 30
hende hòmber tabata gana 30 sén. Nan tabata      cents. That was called paga tera (to pay for the
yama esei ‘paga tera. Nos tabata koba buraku     land). We would dig holes for two to three days,
dos pa tres dia, despues no tin kobamentu mas.   and afterwards there would be no more digging.
Tabatin hopi hende ta planta, pasó kunuku di     There were many people for planting as the
shon tabata hopi grandi.”                        kunuku of the shon was an enormous piece of
                                                 land.


 There were different variants of the paga tera system on the island. Some people remained
 living and working on the plantations. They were totally dependent on the will of the plan-
 tation owners to provide a piece of land for building their home and for producing their
 food. Some had made arrangements with the owner to have a plot to grow crops on while
 living elsewhere. They were less dependent on the plantation owners than the first group.
 There were also fishermen with a piece of land on the plantation. They had to turn in part
 of their catch to the owners. Sometimes the boat they fished in also belonged to the plan-
 tation owner.”
     In his analysis of post-emancipation society, the sociologist Romer saw this system as
 a working relationship in which both parties benefited. Workers were available to the land
 owners when required, while the workers would have a plot to live and plant on, alongside
other benefits, such as access to water and firewood. At first the paga tera system appeared
to be a way for former slaves to receive a piece of land despite its scarcity, and for the
planters to solve the problem of labour. In practice it remained an economic system in
which the former slaves continued to be oppressed one way or the other.
     The mutually dependent relationship was obviously not always as harmonious. The
following dispute, three years after emancipation, occurred between a plantation owner
and a 65 year old former slave named Catalina. It is also an example of the uncertainty in
the relationship between planters and former slaves.” In this conflict it is becoming appar-
ent that both parties needed to adapt their attitudes to one another. Catalina had conti-
nued living on the plantation land according to the paga tera system. One day she sent her
grandson to chase the birds from her own maize garden, instead of sending him to milk
the land owner’s sheep. When the latter questioned her about this action she was asked
whether she had forgotten that according to existing custom, children living on the plan-
tation had to help with milking the sheeps, after which they could help their family. Catali-
na replied with her hands on her hips, which was considered a sign of disrespect. For this,
the planter gave her a cuff on the ear and demanded she leave the land before midday.
While Catalina fled through the woods to Pannekoek, where some of her relatives lived, the


                                                                                            133
owner reported her act of aggression to the district master.” For her act of impudence
Catalina received correctional punishment of three days imprisonment.” She was thus
penalized in the interest of the planter.
    The paga tera system principally benefited the land owners. The workers had access to
a plot of land, as was the case during slavery, but now they had to pay for it through their
labour. It also provided the plantation owners with a cheap and steady supply of workers
when required. The plantation owners did not make permanent rent agreements with field
workers, as it was more convenient to keep them as day labourers and to employ them only
as and when needed. This was also visible in the instability of their income. Field workers
would earn fifty to sixty cents when they had work. This could increase to seventy five
cents or one guilder in the rainy season, with domestic servants earning eight to ten
guilders a month.”
    When six months after emancipation several district commissioners related the state of
affairs regarding work in their respective districts, their experiences varied. In districts with
more plantations, such as the fifth, field workers were more in demand. There the com-
missioner complained about field workers and also about domestic servants. Both groups
were accused of negligence and failing to comply with their duties.” In the second district,
with relatively few plantations, there were no complaints about the field workers. The dis-
trict master mostly complained about animal keepers and domestic servants in permanent
employment. They were also considered slow and negligent.” The labour of animal keep-
ers and domestic servants was constantly needed on the plantations, where they were
employed permanently. Most plantations combined agriculture with animal husbandry.
The milk and the meat were sold in town, while the animal hides were transported to
Europe and the United States. The sheep and goat manure was exported to Barbados
(Zwijsen 1910:62).

Seferina Valks, whose father worked as an animal keeper on plantation Knip, related the
following:

Mi tata tabata wak kabritu pa shon.              My father used to look after the goats of the
                                                 shon.
Tur djaluna e tabata hana 6 kana di arina di     Every Monday he would get 6 kilo's of corn
funchi.                                          meal.
E tabata gana tres yotin tambe pa siman.         In addition he earned one guilder fifty per
Despues esaki a bira tres sinkuenta.             week. Afterwards it became three fifty.
Ku e plaka ei el a kria nos.                      With that money he raised us.
Ku e plaka ei, aria di funchi i kosecha di nos __ With that money, the flour and the harvest of
mes kunuku.®                                      his own piece of land.


Elderly people preferred to continue living on the plantations. For them starting a new life
outside the plantation was not easy. Some had served for a very long time on the planta-
tions. There they had their homes, their pieces of land. Sometimes they had been living on
the plantation for generations. Members of their families were buried on the plantation
ground, since several plantations had their own slave cemeteries. An informant told Juliana


134
in 1960 that she remembered how her mother used to keep up the graves on the planta-
tion where her ancestors had been buried. They were thus accustomed to the way of life on
the plantations, had their social relations there and did not welcome the prospect of mov-
ing elsewhere.
     However, due to the unstable economic situation in some cases plantations changed
hands regularly.” The death of a plantation owner or the merging of two plantations, or a
plantation’s acquisition by the government (due to financial problems of a planter) were
likely to jeopardise the status quo. The proverb: ‘shon nobo, lei nobo’ (new owners, new
laws) may be indicative of this.
     In most cases the plantation owners determined the pattern of daily life for those liv-
ing on their land. They were thus bound hand and foot. When some would request a piece
of land outside the plantation where they lived and worked, the owners in question some-
times resisted their departure and did their utmost to make sure that they stayed on their
plantation. By acting in this way they could depend on having a labour force at all times.”
Leaving the plantation was seen as a way of withdrawing oneself from regular work and
displaying an act of independence and autonomy.” These people were hence refused a
piece of land on the grounds of Regulation GB 23 August 1864/554, stating that individu-
als who already had a piece of land on a plantation and could provide a living for them-
selves and their family through manual labour, would be unable to rent a piece of govern-
ment land.” The paga tera system was clearly a way to continue exercising control over the
life and labour of workers. This was confirmed in the following interview.

Mi tabata biba na kunuku, anto ora yega           I was living in the kunuku and when it was the
tempu di afia, shon di kunuku grandi ta yama      right time of the year, the shon, owner of the
hende pa bin koba buraku. Hombernan ta koba       large kunuku, would call on the people to come
buraku i muhénan ta planta. Nan ta tira pipi-     and dig holes and plant. The men would dig the
ta di maishi den buraku 1 tapa e buraku ku        holes, while the women would plant. They had to
tera, ku nan pia. Un dia shon Janchi a manda      throw the maize into the holes and cover them
un karta manda bisami, tal dia ta bai koba        with dirt, with their feet. One day, shon Janchi
planta, anto pa mi bai kushiná pa e hendenan.     wrote me a letter to tell me that on such and such
Mata kabritu kosnan ei, kushiná pa hende ku       a day, people would go planting and thatIhad to
ta traha. M’a skibié manda bis’é mi no por bai,   cook for the people. A goat would be slaughtered
e por buska un otro hendepa manda. El a bolbe     and I would have to cook for the people. I wrote
skibimi manda bisami si ta pa buska hende         him back a letter and told him that I was not
manda, anto t’e lo sa ku e ta buska hende         able to go and that he could look for someone else
manda. Awe t'ami el a manda bisa pa bat.”         to do the job. He wrote back and told me that he
                                                  was the person who can decide who to send for.
                                                  Today it is me he sent for.


Another informant states:


Mi tata tabata biaha bordo di Flambechi,          My father used to travel on board the ‘Flam-
bordo di Zulia, Caracas, Maracaibo. E ta hast     bechi) the ‘Zulia’, the ‘Caracas’ and the ‘Mara-
biaha pa Maracaibo, pa Caracas, pa Merka. E       caibo’. He travelled to Maracaibo, Caracas and
ta hafia un rid pa ora. P’e tempu ei ta hopi.     the United States. He earned one rid (fifteen


                                                                                                ISS
Anto ku yega tempu di ana, e shon ta bisami:           cents) per hour. In those days it was much.
‘Bo tata, en taki. Mi tin ocho ana (a nase na          When the time of year arrived, the planter
1898). Mi ta bai skol. Mi mama ta bisa: Mi yu,         would tell me: your father is not here. I was
bo mester bai Punda, bai mira ku bo ta hana            eight years old then (I was born in 1898) and
Pachi. Mi ta sali, mi ta bai, mi n° por bai skol.      was going to school. My mother would tell me,
Mi tabata bai Punda. M’a yega, nan ta bisami:          son, you have to go to town, and see ifyou find
‘Bo tata a sali basta ora kaba, el a laga kos na       Pachi. I would go then and could not go to
Chiné den hanchi di Punda ei. Chine ta bende           school. I wanted to go to school, but could not.
kos ei. Mi ta bai serka Chinè ie ta bisa: “Bo tata      When I reached town, the people would tell me:
a laga e bonder aki pa bo. El a laga tres plaka         ‘Your father left hours ago and left some things
pa mi. Mi ta yega kas. Su manisé mi ta bat.            for you at Chine...’ Chinè was a vendor in one of
Shon ta bisa: ‘O, Adòl n’ bin?’ ‘No, el a bai          the alleys in town. I would go there and Chine
laman. Tur afia e (mi tata) tin ku fei, no. Tur        would tell me. Your father left this bag for you.
afia e tei traha. Dia ke shon et ke, e dia ei, e tin   He left fifteen cents. I go home. The next day, the
ku keda sin bai Punda p’e keda. E ku mi wela ta        planter would ask me ‘Oh! Adòl is not coming,
traha huntu. Mi wela ta pega kandela, traha            is he?’ ‘No, he went sailing. Every year my
kofi, pa kada hende trahado ku bini. Riba e dia        father had to be ready. He had to work for the
ei hopi hende ta traha pa shon. Dia di koba, di        planter. When the owner wanted him to be
planta, bo ta hara hendenan ta koba, planta.”           there he could not go to the town, but had to
                                                       stay back. He and my grandmother would work
                                                        together. My grandmother would light the fire
                                                       and make coffee for all the workers. On that day
                                                        many people worked for the land owner. On the
                                                       day ofdigging holes and planting, you will find
                                                        the people digging and planting.


The power of plantation owners was often exercised in an arbitrary way. There is evidence
of conflict in the relationship between land owners and workers. The reality of the paga
tera system varied according to the personality of the owner. For instance, on certain plan-
tations the workers were not allowed to dance the tambú while on others this was not con-
sidered a problem. In 1870 on plantation Porto Mari people held a celebration with drum-
ming after they had finished building their home”, while in 1874 on plantation Santa
Cruz, the fitó was caught in a fight with a tambú player when he wanted to stop the feast.”°
    When individuals failed to abide by the rules of the plantation they were given ‘ora di
porta’: an order to leave the plantation within 24 hours.” Plantation owners feared that
such people would incite others and be a ‘bad example’ (sifia mal ehèmpel). Such was the
case, for instance, with Saxen, the slave of N. Rojer. After emancipation he remained on the
plantation of Wacao, where he was in charge of the horses. In his request to the district
master for a piece of land Saxen claimed that he was forced to leave the plantation.
     During the usual investigations for the request, the district master found out that Saxen
had complained to the owner that some of his animals had destroyed his maize garden.
Due to this complaint the owner had given him two days to leave the plantation.”
     Someone who had been chased from the land and was thought impudent, would not
easily find a piece of land to live on.” In 1892, thirty years after the end of slavery, the
finance administrator described the ora di porta rule to the governor as a relic of the slav-
ery period. According to him, the plantation owners still saw blacks as the descendants of


136
those who had once been their property and demanded unconditional subordination from
them. “They would allow them to live on their land on their conditions. When they saw fit,
they could ban an entire family from their land without prior warning, leaving the family
unemployed and homeless.’
    The ora di porta rule was described by an informant as follows:

Ora shon bisabo traha bo tin ku traha. Un dia,      If the shon orders you to do work, you have to
mi ta spera yu, un anochi mi mester a bai traha     work. One night, when I was pregnant, I had to
den salina pa koba salu. E dia siguiente, e dofio   work on the salt-pans and dig salt. The follow-
a manda un karta 1 a eksigípa mi bin bua salu       ing day, the owner wrote me a letter and
den dia tambe. Mi a manda bis’é ku mi no por        demanded me to come and dig salt during the
bini. El a dunami 24 ora, ‘ora di porta. Mi a       day as well. I sent to tell him thatIcould not go.
keda sin bai, anto mi no a bua salu mas. *!         They gave me 24 hours notice. I didn’t go and
                                                    did not dig salt anymore.


Or, as Carlos Koeiman pointed out:

(Pasó mi tata no tabat’ei tempu di ana) shon a      (Because my father was not there in time for
lanta ku mi tata. Ma, e shon ta (bata riba) ku      planting) the shon went against him. Even
mi tanta, ruman di mi mama, ma en tene              though the planter lived together with my aunt,
konsiderashon   ku nos. El a saka nos foi su        the sister of my mother, he was not considerate
kunuku.                                             towards us. He chased us from his kunuku.


Some plantations continued to apply the same labour routines as during slavery. On one
plantation in the western part of the island, they continued to ring the bell to anounce the
work.


S.V.: Nan ta bati klok 6 or di mainta. Tur main-    S.V.: They used to ring the bell at six o’clock in
ta. Bo mester ta trempan. Si bo hera yega lat,      the morning. Every morning. You had to be
shon ta birabo, mandabo bèk. No ta pèrmitíbo        there in time. If you happened to be late, the
traha mas.                                          shon would send you back. You would not be
                                                    allowed to work anymore.
R.A.: Kuantu afia sefiora tabatin?                  R.A.: How old were you at that time?
S.V.: Un 17 pa 18 ana                               S.V.: About 17 or 18 years old
R.A.: Orashon manda un hende bèk, e por keda        R.A.: When the shon sends a person back, is he
riba plantashi?                                     allowed to stay on the plantation?
S.V.: No, no, nd. E ta kore ku nan, saka nan for    S.V.: No, no no. He will chase them from the
di su kurá. Anto tin hende ta hui, despues bint     plantation. Sometimes the person would run
bèk. Ku shon hafia sa, pasó tin hasido di redu,     away and return. But when the shon gets to
ku e hafia sa e ta bolbe manda e hende ei bèk.      know that, because there are gossipers, if he gets
Esei ta e tempunan ayd. Awor aki no. Aworaki        to know, he would chase him out again. Those
no tin e kosnan et.”                                were different days. Now that cannot happen
                                                    anymore. Nowadays these things don’t happen.




                                                                                                  137
Up until the early twentieth century the paga tera system continued to exist in the western
part of the island. In the eastern part it had all but disappeared due to a large distribution
of government land. In addition, the town was close by, and the mining industry was also
found there, offering employment prospects to the manumitted former slaves. The paga
tera system was attacked by the Dutch socialist van Kol, particularly on account of the
working conditions (van Kol 1904:304). Whereas van der Gon Netscher in 1869 consi-
dered the system a favour to the black population, van Kol, who visited the island at the
beginning of the twentieth century, saw it as a legacy of slavery. He gave a detailed descrip-
tion of the system in that period, which had not changed over the years. He noted that:

      On some plantations pieces ofland were given out on which the black population built
      their huts and planted maize. Sometimes they had to work 10 to 12 days a year with-
      out payment   from the land owner or three days a week with a compensation of15 cents
      per day. The salary would also be paid in maize. In addition, the farmer had to give all
      the maize stalks to the land owner, which often meant handing over the entire harvest
      as in drought years no maize would ripen on these stalks (van Kol 1904:308).

The land owners’ commitment to rigid control over the farmers’ time and mobility gener-
ated deep hostility among the people, who had expected independence after freedom. The
following statement shows that some did not see any difference between the pre- and post-
slavery period. It also reveals that former slaves, both men and women, saw field labour as
something degrading.

Bo ta hende grandi, bo ta traha pa fitó. Fitó ta  You are an adult and you are working for the
mucha. Bo por ta su tata. Awor aki nos no tine _ fitd (overseer). The fitó is young. You could be
kosnan ei mas na Korsou paso Shell a bini.       his father. Now we don’t have that kind of
                                                  things in Curacao any longer, because of the
                                                   Shell (oil-refinery).
Shell a bini, para tur e sufrimentunan ei, para     The Shell came and stopped all this suffering,
sklabitut na Kòrsou. Bo por kere un hende ta       stopped slavery on Curacao. Can you believe
piki su chapi seis or di mainta, banda di ocho or _ that someone will pick up a hoe from six o’clock
e ta kome un poko funchi, banda di dos or i in the morning to work and about eight o’clock
sinku or di atardi tambe, traha, chapi te seis      he will eat some funchi, about two o'clock in
or... Esei ta traha manera katibu.™                 afternoon and five o'clock again and work with
                                                    the hoe till six o'clock... That is slavery.

Often they criticized the land owners controlling the system, because they paid them no
respect.

E shonnan, bosa nan ta tratabo ku menospresio, _The land owners, you know, they treat you with
paso bo ta pober. No e manera ku Dios tabata    disdain, because you are poor. Thatisnot the way
ke pa ta, pero ta asina nan ta tratabo.         God meant it to be, but that's the way they treat
Kastigábo, abusá di bo, bo mester keda sumiso, _us. Punish you, abuse you, you have to be sub-
bo tata mester keda sumiso, bo mama mester _ servient, your father must be subservient, your
keda sumiso.
         $    Bo mester dominá bo mes, pasó     mother must be subservient. You must control
asina e shonnan ta.”                            your temper. That is how the land owners were.

138
The power of the plantation owners extended to the workers’ children. Many were held
back due to this, as an informant (born 1908) interviewed in 1992 recalls.


E.Q.: Mi a nase na plantashi Siberie. Mi tata      E.Q.: I was born on the plantation Siberie. My
tabata wak baka pa shon. Mi a nase bou             father used to look after the cattle for the shon.
dominio di shon. Nan tabata hende ku hopi          I grew up under the control of the shon. These
poder. Nos a bai skol na Wilibròdu. Bida taba-     were people with a lot of power. We went to
ta duru. Mi tambe tabata wak baka den              school in Willibrordus. Life was very hard. I also
kunuku huntu ku mi tata. Shon tabatin hopi          used to look after the cattle together with my
poder. Nan a eksigipa mi kita skol promé ku mi     father in the kunuku. The shon had a lot of
tempu pa mi traha na nan lugá na Otrobanda.        power. They demanded that I left school before
                                                   time so that I could work at their place in town
                                                   (Otrobanda).
R.A.: Traha komo kiko?                             R.A.: To work as what?
E.Q: Traha komo nan krid. Mi a kere ku si mi       E.Q.: To work as a servant. I thought when I
bai Punda(stat), nan ta mandami skol. Despues      went to work in town, that they would send me
mi a kuminsá yora i mi no tabata ker a keda        to school. Afterwards I started to cry and did not
serka e shon. E shon a bisami, nò, bo tin ku       want to stay with the shon. The shon told me
keda. Mi a bai, bai traha serka un bas di          no, I had to stay. I left and went to work in the
karpinté. Despues mi a bai for di e isla.”         workshop of a carpenter. Afterwards I left the
                                                   island.


One recurrent theme on plantation life was the relationship between the shons and the
women living on their plantations. According to oral history the shons sought young
women on their plantations. If the parents refused they would be sent away from the plan-
tations. It was often a topic of gossip. Some Afro-Curagaoan women preferred to gain from
being a white man‘s concubine rather than being a black men’s wife, as the offspring would
reap the benefit of having a lighter skin colour.

I.S.: Shon Manchi e no a kasa anto, e tabatin yu   LS. Shon Manchi never married, but he had
afó. E ta kuenan, ma famia no ta kuenan komo       children out of wedlock. He recognized them,
famia. Ta afó e tin nan.                           but his family did not recognize them as family
                                                   members. They were born out of wedlock.
R.A.: Yu ku muhé pretu                             R.A.: He had a child with a black woman?
LS.: Pasó un shon ta haa un yu ku un negru,        LS.: The shon gets a child with a black person,
e no ta presentá komo tata. Abo muhé ta sa, ku     he does not come out as the father. You being the
tal hende ta tata di e yu. Pero e no ta presenta   woman will know that such and such a person
manera nos negru por presentá, anke nos no ta      is the father of the child. But he will not come
kria yu, ma nos ta presenta.”                      out as the father as we blacks would do. Even
                                                   though we don’t take care of the child, we will
                                                   come out as its father.

The following informant also gave an example of such a relationship between a plantation
owner and a worker.




                                                                                                 139
S.V.: Na kunuku di shon tabatin diferente         S.V.: On the plantation you had several women.
hende muhé. Bo tabatin Petra, Anna, bo            You had Petra, Ann, you had Eve, who had child-
tabatin Eva, ku tabatin yu ku shon (informante    ren with the owner.   (The informant laughs).
ta hari). Shon tabata gusta muhé. El a rekonosé   This is shon Harry (laughter). Shon was good for
e muchanan. E tabatin yu ku un muhé ku yama       himself. He did recognize those children. He also
Mercelina. Despues el a bai biba na un otro       had children by a lady named Merceline. Then
kunuku ku un otro muhé. El a hana nuebe yu        he went to live on another plantation together
kuné. El a lubidá Mercelina. Nan a kant’é den     with another woman. He got nine children by
un kantika:                                       her. The other woman Merceline was forgotten.
                                                  They sang this ‘story’ in a song:
Shon a planta bonchi                              The shon has planted beans
Pa Mercelin bin kue bonchi                        For Merceline to come and pick beans”
Ma Terecilia kabes di buriku                      But Terecila, she with the donkey head”
A bin kue bonchi mata rama.”                      Came to pick the beans and killed the bush.”


One of the advantages of living on the plantations under the paga tera system was that
people would have better access to water, sometimes very difficult to attain, as there were
often periods of drought on the island. In 1868, people living in town were dying of dehy-
dration as even the ‘donkeys and mules were too weak to bring water to the town’ (Bren-
neker 1986:120-1). In 1883 a priest wrote that sometimes people would pay 20 to 30 cents
—a daily wage — for a small tub of water.” A similar phenomenon is also described in the
beginning of the twentieth century. In the dry season the price of rainwater — in an ordi-
nary year five to ten cents for a tub of 18 litres — rose to 25/30 cents for the same quantity
(Blink 1907:56). Priests would ask the government and others for help, as those in the
countryside in particular would suffer from to the lack of water.” Even into the twentieth
century pure drinking water was difficult to attain and expensive in Curacao. The lack of
which was one of the mayor causes for the high infant mortality rate (Dekker 1982:217).
    One of the major complaints made of the paga tera system concerned the lack of drink-
ing water. The daily struggle by Afro-Curacaoans centered as much on water as it did on
land and food. The search for water was a major preoccupation and took a great deal of
time and energy. Many stories were told about the hardships of collecting water. People,
especially young children, would often have to walk several kilometres to collect water.
This could be a dangerous task, especially for children; drownings were not unknown.”
    The following informant, born in 1900 on plantation Kenepa, stressed that even
though he lived under the paga tera system, he was unable to find drinking water easily.
The plantation owner allowed his cattle to pollute the water and it was sometimes full of
cow dung and urine.


Ora mi ta bai skol bini, mi mama ta mandami       When I came back from school in the afternoon,
bai saka awa na tanki di awa. Mama ta bisami:     my mother would send me to fetch water from
‘Bai saka poko awa, anto mi ta tota dos maishi    the tank. Mother would say: ‘Go and fetch
warda pa bo. Kontentu mi ta bai, pasó mi kier     water and I will toast some maize for you.’ I
men, mi tin chèns di hatta maishi. Den e tanki-   would be very glad to go, because I would get
nan di awa, e bakanan di shon tabata bai bebe     some maize in return. But... the cows of the
awa. E bakanan sa bai kana bai te meimei di       landlord would go into the tank where we took


140
awa, anto bai para pishi. Ora mi saka e awa, mi       our water and urinate inside. When we would
ta mira mitar di e awa, kasi bèrdè, puru pishi.       fetch the water, it would be green..., pure piss.
Duele. Un kos asina ei no ta pasa awor. Mi ta          Very pitiful. Something like that could not hap-
bisa nan na kas, anto defuntu mi tata ta sifiami      pen nowadays. When I arrived home, I would
kòrta kadushi, anto pone den awa, bir’é, bir’é,       tell them and my father, may God rest his soul,
bir’é. E ta kria lèbèlèbè, traga ta sali un tiki ku   would teach us to cut a cactus, put it in the
nos por beb’é. Ta esei t'awa. N° tatin otro           water, turn and turn and turn it. It would
kaminda. I tog tabatin pos den kurá di shon.          become like a slimmy matter, the dirt would go
Tur loke teiden ta di shon. Bo n° por papia           into the slime and the water would remain
nada, tampoko. Bon, despues ku kos a bira di          clean, so that we could drink it. That was the
remate, anto a bai pidi shon pa bai kue poko          water we had. There was no other place. And
awa. Nos a bin traha un baki parti pafó di            still on the land of the shon, there were a lot of
tranké, ku hende por a bai kue.Ma tin biaha           wells, But everything belonged to the shon. Well
bientu n’ ta supla i bo ta hana 10 hende ei. Un       it became unbearable. We went to ask the shon
mester para warda riba otro. Mir'aki!!! Si bo w       permission to fetch water in his yard. They built
ta pasa den malu, bo n’ ta sa kon malu ta. Awor       a water reservoir outside the yard where people
mi ta rekonosé e kos, m'a e dia nos ta den e kos      could fetch water. But sometimes there would
nos mes n° ta ripará.”                                be no wind and ten people would be waiting for
                                                      their turn to fetch water. Look here. If you
                                                      haven't experienced bad life, you don’t know
                                                      what a bad life is. Now we do recognize this life,
                                                      but when we were in the middle of it, we our-
                                                      selves did not recognize it.




Conclusion

With the end of slavery, so ended the legal slave status of Afro-Curagaoans. The colonial
State now had jurisdiction over these freedpeople. Officially the State played a more pro-
nounced and instrumental role in shaping the legal framework for social relationships.
The social reality of emancipation was more complicated than merely recognizing the legal
freedom of people. The change of perception within the white population which this also
implied was long in coming.
     The laws and regulations put in place were concerned with far more than simply reg-
ulating the social life of people. Plantation owners continued to assert control over the
lives of people both in a direct and an indirect way. For many years they had direct domi-
nation over the lives of those who continued in the paga tera system, whereby the latter
worked and lived on the plantation ground. In addition, as most of these planters had
executive functions in governmental institutions as well, they could indirectly control the
lives of a large part of the Afro-Curagaoan population.
   In the area of work, their interests were important considerations in the implementa-
tion of laws. The State then became a prime instrument in maintaining labour discipline.
The rules enforced were dominated by the racist ideas prevalent at the time, which
assumed that Afro-Curagaoans were unable to deal with freedom and to be successful, free
citizens.




                                                                                                    141
The power of the plantation owners also affected the land distribution among Afro-
Curacaoans. The different regulations regarding land and land distribution were aimed at
instilling a labour discipline and orderly behaviour among Afro-Curacaoans. In the distri-
bution of land the plantation owners’ power was also felt, as the application for a piece of
land could be refused based on their judgement of the applicant’s character. In this way
control over the distribution of land was used as a disciplinary device.
     As the twentieth century approached, the power of the plantation owners began to
diminish. However, the State did not succeed in de-institutionalizing the existing social
inequality based on ethnic and racial differences — if it indeed attempted to do so in the
first place.



Notes

   NatAr, Publicatie Blad A 1863, no. 11.
   NatAr, Publicatie Blad A 1863, no. 23.
   NatAr, Publicatie Blad A 1863, no. 17.
   NatAr, Publicatie Blad A 1863, no. 18.
B®
Oa
Fe
ON NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 125, 17-5-
       1863.
6      NA, Ministerie van Koloniën, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6739, 20-1-1864.
7      NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, 1863-1905, inv. no. 140, 5 -3-
       1866/9.
8      NatAr, Publicatie Blad 1862/15, Article 21; “Wet houdende opheffing der slavernij op de eilanden
       Curacao, Bonaire, Aruba, Sint Eustatius, Saba en Sint Maarten (Nederlands gedeelte)’.
9      NatAr, Publicatie Blad 1863/18; “Wet tot wering van lediggang en zwerverij.
10 NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6734, 31-12-1862/906.
11 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district,1863-1904, inv. no. 127, 1-10-
       1867/143.
12 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, 1863-1905, inv. no. 140, 5 -3-
       1866/9. See minutes of meeting 24-11-1909 of the Commission appointed by the government
       (30-7-1909/489) to investigate the situation of large-scale farming in the colony of Curacao
       (Koloniaal Verslag 1910).
13 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 13-5-
   1866/83. See also NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 3e district, 1863-1906,
   inv. no. 139, 22-5-1864/54).
14 NatAr, Publicatie Blad 1863/18, Article 4.
15 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 3e district, 1863-1906, inv. no. 139, 28-5-
       1864/58.
16 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Administratie van Financién, 1892, inv. no. 37, 18-5-
       1892/215 and 14-5-1892/212.
17 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1873, Procesverbaal no. 31.
18 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1872, Procesverbaal no. 32.
19 NatAr, Publicatie Blad 1863/17.
20 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 6-2-
       1865/8.
21 Idem. The district master said to have taken this action after having received a letter from the
   government dated 11-5-1866/190, stating that all those not behaving properly on Pannekoek and



 142
     Dokterstuin (plantation grounds which had recently been purchased by the government), would
     be removed.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 4e district, 1863-1906, inv. no. 147, 6-1-
     1864/2, 14-1-1864/ 4, 17-3-1864/22,   13-4-1864/26 and 27-5-1864/34.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 3e district, 1863-1906, inv. no. 139, 9-1-
     1864/3.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 4e district, 1863-1906, inv. no. 3698, 19-
     9-1863.
     NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6784, 22-6-1886/386.
     NatAr, Publicatie Blad 1865/12 (‘Wet houdende strafbepaling tegen niet naleving der ver-
     plichtingen bij huur van dienst’).
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, 1863-1905, inv. no. 133, 26-5-
     1865.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 26-5-
     1866/45 and 28-5-1866/47.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 16-6-
     1866/87. See also NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6787, 18-1-1889/42.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Administratie van Financién, 1892, inv. no. 36, 11-12-
     1894/16.
     Even plantations owners were suspected of selling illicit alcohol on their plantations, as a way of
     making an additional income. NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Administratie van Finan-
     cién, 1892, inv. no. 37, 16-9-1893/381.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Geheime stukken, 1861-1880, inv. no. 3659, 17-7-1866/4,
     19-7-1866/no number, 19-7-1877/55 and 20-7-1866/18.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Geheime stukken, 1861-1880, inv. no. 3659, 19-7-1866/55.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 127, 1-10-
     1867/143.
     Renkema 1981a:157. In 1883 Eskildsen was district master of the fourth district and from 1884-
     1892 the fifth district also became his responsibility.
     Brenneker 1970:1836. Many people complained that their animals had been stolen. As the ani-
     mals of land owners had a mark in each ear, and theirs in only one ear, their animals could eas-
   ily be taken by the land owners.
37 For example, it was only in 1868, when the civil code came into force, that the commissioners
   were given better guidelines on civil matters (see Burgerlijk Wetboek voor Curacao, KB, 4-9-
   1868/18; NatAr, Publicatie Blad 1868/76.)
38 Amigoe, 10-9-1904.
39 The benta is a musical instrument in the form of a bow. The player uses his mouth as a sound
     box, while constantly changing the position of a knife on the string.
40 ‘Jansofat’ is the name of a plantation.
4] NatAr, Parket van den Procureur-generaal, inv. no. 484, 28-5-1911.
42 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Ingekomen stukken 3e district, 1860-1905, inv. no. 53, 4-
   2-1902.
43 Interview Eduardo Tokaai (born 1899), Allen, 12-9-1984 (NatAr).
44 This also led to discussions in the Dutch House of Commons revolving around the possible sale
     of Curacao, as a result of which the Colonial Council became very alarmed. Renkema 1976.
45   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, 1863-1905, inv. no. 132, 26-3-
   1873/48.
46 This is derived from the Dutch word ‘marechaussee’.
47 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 19-1-
   1866/1.




                                                                                                    143
                                                                                           36, 27-
48 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Ingekomen stukken 3e district, 1860-1905, inv. no.
       11-1866/442.
                                                                                                29-11-
49     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 3e district, 1863-1906, inv. no. 140,
       1866/97.
50     NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6747, 16-5-1872/220.
51 Interview Henriette Cooks (born 1877), Brenneker/Juliana, 1958 (Zikinza-collection, T 766,
   NatAr).
52 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 2 -5-
       1865/61; see the case of the marechaussee who was so drunk that he stripped off his clothes
       (NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 7-5-
       1866/54 and 15-5-1866/58.
53 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 127, 26-10-
       1866/162.
54 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, 1863-1905, inv. no. 131, 29-7-
       1864/76.
55     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 3e district, 1863-1906, inv. no. 140, 27-12-
       1866.
56 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e en 3e district, inv. no. 164, 14-9-
   1908/2945; NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e en 3e district, inv. no. 164,
       24-9-1908/299.
57 La Cruz, 4-9-1918.
58 De Pool 1935:81.
59 Interview Virginia (Ina) Servinia (born 1-10-1910), Allen, 27-11-1986 (NatAr).
60 Interview Seferina Valks (born 1903), Allen, 8-9-1983 (NatAr).
61 Van Dissel 1868:443-4. For example, part of the work force on plantation Koraal Tabak (at the
   bay of Sint Joris in the eastern part of the island) focused on fishing.
62     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 29 -1-
       1866/9. This manifested itself in several ways. For example, the owner of the plantation of Ascen-
       cion complained to the district master that she felt insulted as she had been answered back in a
       disrespectful way by a woman called Margaritha living in Dokterstuin, after her cart had col-
       lided on a narrow road with her when she was taking products to town. Margaritha lost large
       part of her produce and was punished for her verbal insult. NatAr, Archief van het Gouverne-
       ment, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 7-3-1866/23.
63     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 29-1-
       1866/9 and 31-1-1866/11.
64 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 2-2-
       1866/14.
65 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, 1863-1905, inv. no. 131, 25-5-
       1864/27.
66 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 125, 12-1-
       1864/2 and 13-5-1864/21.
67 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, 1863-1905, inv. no. (SMSS
       1864/21.
68     Interview Seferina Valks (born 1903 in Kenepa), Allen, 8-9-1983 (NatAr).
69 After 1863 several plantations were sold in an auction by the ‘Weeskamer’ or by the Curagaoan
       mortgage bank: Klein Kwartier (in 1868), Groot Davelaar (in 1870), Stenen Koraal (in 1882),
       Daniel and Grote Berg (in 1886) and Engelenberg (in 1898). In the same period Wacao, Lelien-
   berg, Sint Hieronumus and Paradera (in 1878) and Valentijn (in 1894) were auctioned by a pri-
   vate loan holder (Renkema 1981a:186).
70 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, 1863-1905, inv. no. 132,
                                                                                            16-5-
       1867/1.




 144
71   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 6-8-
     1864/83.
7?) NA, Ministerie van Koloniën, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6739, 23-8-1864/554. This land was owned by
     the government to be distributed among the popular class. The State began to buy pieces of land
     from plantation owners in anticipation of emancipation.
73 Interview N. Simmons (born 1888), Allen, 15-1-1980 (NatAr).
74 Interview Carlos Koeiman (born 1898), Allen, 6-5-1986 (NatAr).
75 NatAr, Hof van Justitie, PV 1870.
76 NatAr, Hof van Justitie, PV 1874.
77 Sometimes people would go and live on a different plantation after having been chased away
     from their homes. For example, Leontina was chased away from San Juan and went to live on
     Groot Santa Marta. As she and her son continued to misbehave, they were again chased away
     from that plantation. NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-
     1904, inv. no. 126, 16-6-1865/87.
78 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 126, 9-6-
     1865/76.
HS) NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 125,15-7-
     1864/70. Angelista Pieter was sent away from a plantation, but was also denied a piece of land
     because she was impudent. See also the case of the couple Johannes and Balentina Schoop, who
     in the beginning of the twentieth century (1903) were denied a piece of government land, after
     having been chased away from the plantation, based on the same criterion. NatAr, Archief van
     het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district 1863-1904, inv. no. 145, 12-3-1903/31.
80   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Administratie van Financiën, 1892, inv. no. 37, 18-5-
     1892/215 and 14-5-1892/212.
81   Interview N. Simmons (born 1888), Allen, 15-1-1980 (NatAr).
82   Interview Carlos Koeiman (born 1898), Allen, 25-5-1986 (NatAr).
83   Interview Seferina Valks (born 1903), Allen, 8-5-1984 (NatAr).
84   Interview Felix Martina (born 21-2-1894), Brenneker/Juliana, 28-3-1978 (T 62, Fundashon Bi-
     blioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
85   Interview Eduardo Tokaai (born 1899), Allen, August 1985 (NatAr).
86   Interview E. Quirindongo (born 14-10-1908), Allen, 1992 (NatAr).
87   Interview Inie Sirvanie (born 1-4-1910), Allen, 27-11-1989 (NatAr).
88   Interview Seferina Valks (born 1903), Allen, 8-5-1984 (NatAr).
89   The shon had children with Merceline.
90   She was called kabes di buriku, donkey head, due to her big head. Despite this feature the shon
     was willing to form a couple with her.
91 The former woman disappeared from his memory.
97 Kerstgeschenk 1883:215.
93 La Union, 12-6-1889 and 29-5-1889. See also NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Ingekomen
     stukken 3e district, 1860-1905, inv. no. 42, 8-5-1889/268.
94 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 127, 1-4-
     1867/53.
95 Interview Didi Sluis (born 1904), Allen/Ernest Gaari, 14-4-1984 (NatAr).




                                                                                                 145
                                                                                             otol
                                                               =i         =,         Sogae    geld MES
                    i                   4                      ’    ne:        7° ove        a      a
                             ‘          ae   it~   .   29           Ss         mit     B                 :

                            sh!              Os                Ware
                                                                 8 a6?
                    i
                                 kads        ras
                                              ks             aad id             serene
                   pee               te                     peel,              Aret Peel wos
                        5            [a                ij
            red   pape
                                                                    TF     Rp                fers
                                 ws                                 Aadorp           ss
                                                               Dt    a
    7   ps piel ind                  tees              We

        n
                  prend
                   PARE                 ie

            af                   n
a
Pte
CHAPTER                 VI

The Roman Catholic Church’s Effort
to Instill Respectability



Introduction

At the time of emancipation the Roman Catholic Church was a primary institution exer-
cising authority and control over the lives of Afro-Curagaoans. As previously stated, after
Niewindt's arrival in 1824 on the island the Church’s missionary efforts broadened. By the
mid-nineteenth century the Church had successfully established its position as a driving
force in the lives of the enslaved and the freed black population. As can be seen in Table
6.1, in 1860, three years before emancipation, the number of people baptized as Roman
Catholics on Curacao, both enslaved and freed, was already over 16,000, constituting
around 85 per cent of the total population.’

    Table 6.1 Total Number of Baptisms, First Communions and Marriages in 1860


         Parish                Total Catholics          Baptism          First Communion              Marriage
      Santa Ana                      9,000                 315                   2557                     26

      Santa Rosa                     3,300
re Santa Maria                       2,600

       Sint Jozef          -         2,700
   Sint Wilibrordus                  1,000
      Sint Petrus                    1,000
aa       Total                      16,900


   Source: Kerkelijke Courant, ‘Katholieke Nederlandsche stemmen over godsdienst, staat-, geschied- en letter-
   kunde’, no. 291, vol. 28, 26-7-1862




The Church thus gained a firm basis in island society, with the congregations worshipping
at six churches spread across the island, led by fourteen priests and assistant priests.’
    The Church functioned on two levels. One was the conversion of ‘heathens’ and peo-
ple of other religious beliefs. The other was teaching Roman Catholic doctrine and rituals,
which also entailed a change in the mindset of those converted. The Church endeavoured
to adapt the values, norms and attitudes of blacks, believing these to be remnants of Afri-
can cultures and of the slave system. This, they subsumed under the concept of civilization.


                                                                                                                 147
Over time, the Roman Catholic Church evaluated its effort to civilize not only upon its
successes but also on the hardship, doubt and frustration encountered while fulfilling its
mission. There is little written information regarding the response of the Afro-Curagaoans
to the missionary work. In which ways were they susceptible to this conversion? What role
did Catholicism play in their identity-formation and self-perception?
    In this Chapter I will discuss the ways in which the Roman Catholic Church influ-
enced the behaviour patterns of Afro-Curagaoans following emancipation. In the first sec-
tion I will focus on how the Church used the concept of ‘civilization to implement its mis-
sionary work, and how this was based on preconceived ideas and images regarding
Afro-Curacaoans. I will then give an overview of the strategies employed by the Church to
control the social life Afro-Curacaoans. Finally, I will look at how Church and Afro-
Curacaoans interacted and I will analyse the various ways in which the latter responded to
the different forms of control introduced by the Church.



Respectability from a Missionary Perspective
After 1863 the Roman Catholic Church continued its missionary activities among Afro-
Curacaoans. Emancipation actually facilitated this task. The Afro-Curagaoans’ new free-
dom gave them the opportunity to become more active in Church matters. In 1862 the
priest B.Th.J. Frederiks expanded on this in a letter, writing that ‘no doubt, there will be
great opportunities ahead for our Holy religion, due to our emancipation of the enslaved.
May God provide sufficient priests to teach them and to embrace a divine life, because
most of them are ignorant, and as a result live an immoral life.” In his letter dated 20 June
1863, to be read aloud to the freedpeople, the then vicar apostolic Kistemaker set out this
message and related that ‘no longer could they use their position as enslaved as an excuse
for non participation in Church activities.’
     In the time leading up to emancipation the colonial government began to recognize the
work of the Roman Catholic missionaries: it appealed to the Church to help maintain
public order among the soon to be freed population (Latour 1945:68). The members of the
elite class became preoccupied with this change in the social order, believing that blacks
were volatile and would be prone to violence once freed. The Church, however, was of a
different opinion, as Kistemaker emphasized in the previously mentioned letter: ‘Neither
do we think it is necessary to urge you in your desire for freedom to behave “quietly and
peacefully”. After all, thank God that in this colony we do not know of any revolt or resis-
tance against the legal authority” This letter was read aloud in all churches on the island
on the first Sunday after having been received as well as on Emancipation day.
     In their evaluation of that day, priests made sure to emphasize the success of their mis-
sion by stating that freedom had been received without violence. The clergy were proud of
the fact that on 1 July 1863 all Catholic churches on the island had been full of people and
that during the celebrations, which continued over several days, there had been no ‘killing,
plundering, vengeance, or any other irregularity’ (Latour 1945:68). In his retrospective
Latour underscored this as proof of the effectiveness of the Roman Catholic Church’s civil-
izing mission (Latour 1955:9).


148
With freedom, the Catholic priests believed their presence to be more essential than ever.
They compared the behaviour of those freed in 1863 with those freed previously and con-
cluded that the former group was more receptive to religious beliefs and conversion. They
considered that: “They were guided by religion, and in spite of their weakness every indi-
vidual behaved like a free child of God’ (Latour 1952:20). However, in the period following
emancipation, the Church frequently feared that Afro-Curacaoans would regress into what
it termed an ‘uncivilized’ state. In 1875 the priest M.M. Jansen, on his arrival on the island
with two other priests, expressed this anxiety:

    For most of these unfortunates, virtue seems to be a vice and sin to be something good.
    So easily, they leave the path ofvirtue in order to commit wicked acts. We nevertheless
    hope that this situation will change and that these poor souls, entrusted to us, will
    reform themselves and become more virtuous.°

A decade later, faced with an overwhelming feeling of frustration, another priest would
express similar ideas regarding a certain community over which the Church had little con-
trol. This community was situated near that of Sint Willibrordus, on a piece of land named
‘Mondi afó (popularly also called ‘tera di misa’: the land of the Church), ‘kuré di pastor’
(the yard of the priest) or ‘kurá di mishon’ (mission yard)). It was one of the first plots of
land that Niewindt received from the government in order to build a church and a school
(Latour 1940:7):


    If Christianity had not exerted its benevolent influence on the island, a whole popula-
    tion would have become like animals. Fortunately, the Church still has priests who just
    as the disciples and other preachers before them are willing to leave everything and
    spread the gospel among the heathens, to light the flame offaith in the hearts of those
    who dwell in darkness.’ [Translation R.M. Allen]

The essential aim of the Church’s civilizing mission was to turn Afro-Curagaoans into
‘hende drechi’ (decent/respectable people) or ‘un bon katóliko’ (a good Catholic person) —
decent people according to the Roman Catholic model. Their interpretation was based on
the way they saw working class people in their own societies, coupled with their percep-
tions of people from non-European cultures, whom they believed to be on the lowest evo-
lutionary scale. The Church was critical of elements in the social behaviour of Afro-
Curacaoans which it believed required change. The missionaries’ assessment of the
characteristics of Afro-Curacaoans also influenced the ways in which they proceeded with
this civilizing process.
     In the previously mentioned emancipation letter, Kistemaker addressed some of the
flaws considered inherent in Afro-Curacaoans. Examples cited were a tendency towards
idleness and a lack of work discipline. Therefore Kistemaker described work discipline as
a religious activity and he associated laziness with sinful behaviour, punishable by the State
and above all by God.’ The missionaries would continue to reaffirm this observation in
whatever form they could. The Church also paid special attention to marriage and family
life. The western model of marriage was highly valued as an important instrument in the


                                                                                              149
civilizing process. Kistemaker’s letter, read aloud on the day of emancipation, placed heavy
emphasis on marriage and monogamy in association with moral behaviour.
    In the years following emancipation negative stereotyping of Afro-Curacaoans would
increase, while the Church persisted and remained committed to its civilizing mission.
The clergy defined civilization as ‘the refinement of a population, the evolution from a
state of wildness to religious, moral and scientific formation and education’ (Euwens
1906:48). When the priest-historian Euwens refuted the views of a critic who was denying
the civilizing role of the Catholic Church by stating that Afro-Curacaoans remained unci-
vilized, he retorted that ‘Where on earth will one find a people who after fifty years of mis-
sionary work are so docile, have so much love for work, are so loyal to the laws of the
country and so orderly and disciplined, if not on the islands of Curacao, Aruba and
Bonaire?’ (1906:48).
     Over time the Roman Catholic Church would denounce as immoral certain cultural
rituals which persisted among Afro-Curagaoans. De Pool (1935) gives an overview of what
were believed to be such negative African customs. De Pool was a devoted Catholic who
wrote several articles on cultural development during the 1930s. He believed that through
the efforts of the Catholic clergy African customs, such as the previously mentioned eight-
day ceremony called ‘ocho dia — held during eight consecutive nights following a burial,
leading to a concluding ceremony on the last day — were dying out in the first half of the
twentieth century.’ De Pool was clear in his negative view of the ocho dia and pointed out
that: We should undoubtedly be grateful to the Catholic Church, which through its zeal,
perseverance and preaching has made this half barbarism called ocho dia disappear’
(1935:63). His statement has proved to be incorrect, as this custom, along with others, per-
sists until the present day. It does, however, give us an idea of perceptions existing at the
time regarding these customs.
     De Pool continues to describe the ocho dia as ‘a mixture of African superstition and
Catholic ceremony, mixed with some witchcraft, and something more uncivilized than the
highly critized tambú’ (1935:63). He was also appreciative of the Catholic Church for
having eradicated the seu, which was celebrated during the maize harvest: ‘Thanks to the
Catholic Mission, that has always aimed at uplifting the morality of our population, such
a noisy, scandalous ceremony called seu, which has always ended in bloody fighting,
drunkenness and disorder, has disappeared’ (1935:77).
     In a sense de Pool was wrong, as the Church was not against all elements of the set: the
wapamentu, the marching in a particular style, was accepted. During the wapamentu those
who had cut and gathered the maize, together with others living nearby, would dance in a
procession from the fields to the storage depots called ‘mangasina’, while singing songs in
Guene. After emancipation, when the plantation owners’ control was slowly diminishing
and more people were granted government lands to live on, the Church attempted to take
over control of the celebration: following the procession, people would give part of their
harvest to the priests. This was called the ‘seu di pastor’.
     The Church also believed that the impoverished condition in which many Afro-
Curagaoans lived following emancipation had negative effects on their behaviour and
morality. The government was reluctant to help those who were too old, sick or feeble to
work. In 1879 the governor wrote to the district master of Bandabou, explaining that it had


150
never been the State’s intention to be responsible for the welfare of the elderly, let alone fif-
teen years after emancipation (Brenneker 1986:125).
    Following emancipation, the Roman Catholic Church was one of the main institutions
attempting to alleviate poverty within the Afro-Curacaoan community. The Church aided
the poor in many areas; priests often acted as intermediaries between the government and
the poor or the disabled when seeking financial help. The district masters would appeal to
the priests for the names of people in their parishes in need of financial relief. They would
also make arrangements with the State for the care of the poor. There was always work for
the Society established before emancipation to provide funds for the poor to pay for medi-
cal treatment and funeral expenses.
    Roman Catholic priests often acted as arbiters in family problems, for example between
parents and children or between husband and wife, in the case of the former having an
extramarital relationship. They also helped to prevent eviction from the lands. According
to Armando Lampe, the Roman Catholic Church was more efficient in helping the poor
than the State and people would first go to there for help. Lampe (1991:19) argues that
since the mid-nineteenth century, the social service of the Roman Catholic Church was
well organized and efficient. Many members of the older generation recalled with gratitu-
de the aid they received from the Church in their fight against poverty. A female infor-
mant confirmed this and related how the priest

    would help you, when you had a sick child. He would send and look for medicine.
    When we had a year of bad harvest, he used to send to look for seed in Aruba. He would
    share with everyone. Everyone would receive a kana di maishi" for them to plant and
    if it rained we would have food to throw away. We did not have any money. Oh yes,
    there was money, but for those in the Fort’ (the popular name for the colonial govern-
    ment).


Likewise, another elderly person reminisced:


Mi ta kòrda tabatin un pader aki, e pader yama     I remember a priest. His name was Kris. He
Kris. Mi ke ku el a muri. E pader tabata yuda      must have died. The priest used to help people.
hende. E tempu ei bo tabatin botika di Shon        In those days you had the drugstore of Shon
Inchi, den Herenstraat, pariba di Jules Penha. E   Inchi, in the Herenstraat (Punda), east side of
tabata manda e hòmber ku tabata serka dje          the store of Jules Penha. He used to send the
riba kabai, bai buska un anis ku yama ‘anis        man who worked for him on horseback for a
sou’. Buska su bòter di labizjan bini kuné. E      drink named ‘Anis sou.” He would come with a
pastor tabata parti un bòter pareu pa kada         demi-john of the booze. Then he would give
hende.”                                            everyone a small bottle.


At the same time priests also worked towards instilling acceptance of poverty in the peo-
ple. Religion was used as an important instrument for accepting destiny. Phrases such as
‘keda konforme ku kiko bo tin’ (be satisfied with what you have), ‘no tin pena sin Gloria’
(there is no suffering without glory), ‘probresa ku onor no ta ofensivo’ (poverty with
honour is no disgrace) recurred in many discourses." A priest describing the poor


                                                                                              151
community of San Willibrordus in the western part of the island in a Church magazine
concluded his article by noting that ‘the people of San Willibrordus are poor, very poor
and live in miserable houses, but their religion gives them comfort. We only must have
patience and keep on hoping, one of the virtues of dealing with poverty.”

An informant reiterated this:


T.P: Barika yen ta ruman di mal morto.               T.P: A full belly is the brother or sister of bad
                                                     death.
E.J.: Kiko esei ke men?                              E.J.: What does that mean?
T.P: Ora bo barika ta yen, bo ta hasi kos ku bo      T.P: When your belly is full, you do things which
no tin mester di hasi. Laga nos pone ku bo ta na     you should not do. For instance: you will sit at
kas sintá, bo ta pensa ku bo tin ku bai laman        home, and it occurs to you that you have to go to
bai landa. Bo ta bai landa, anto hoga. Un otro       the beach. You will go to swim, and drown.
ehémpel di barika yen: bo tin sèn den bo saku.       Another example of a full belly: you have money
Bo ta sintá na kas, no, bo ta sali bai bebe. Bo ta   in your pocket. You will not stay at home; you
fuma, bo ta haa bo den un aksidente. Bo ta           will go out and drink. You are drunk and will get
sali asina ei bai buska bo morto. Bo no ke keda      an accident. So you will just go out to look where
kas, paso plaka ta mandabo sali.'*                   death is. You don’t want to stay at home, because
                                                     the money encourages you to go out.

In this process of conversion and civilizing some individual missionaries stood out due to
their actions. Jean and John Comaroff state that anthropologists examine in minute detail
the social and cultural conventions of Africans, whereas Europeans are seldom placed
under the same scrutiny. The evangelists are not studied as individuals, with socially con-
ditioned biographies that make a difference, but are taken for granted, faceless actors on
the colonial stage. However, their actions and interactions were deeply influenced by their
backgrounds, their cultures and ideologies (Comaroff 1991:54). On Curacao this was also
the case. Over time the Catholic Church encouraged priests to alternate in preaching to the
congregations. In this way the people were exposed to different interpretations and ap-
proaches to the idea of civilization.
    Certain priests left their mark on Church policies, which on their implementation were
either accepted or resisted by the people. In addition, individual priests — through their
deeds and sermons — provoked emotion in the congregations and were remembered in
oral narratives. For example, Vincent Jansen, who was born on 1 June 1850 in the Dutch
town of Schiedam and who arrived on the island on 16 December 1876, was remembered
long after his death on 5 August 1890. Many elderly people spoke about him with much
respect, even though they had not known him personally. As a secular priest”, he was not
tied to any particular congregation, but fell directly under the vicar apostolic. Besides
being a priest, he was an orator, photographer, writer (under the name ‘Tpi’) and the inven-
tor of an electric master clock, which he patented in the United States in 1889 (Latour
1950:24).
    But it was principally his effort in setting up the community of Willibrordus, by help-
ing a number of people to become autonomous fishermen that made him popular among
the people. In that way people could do other types of work, making them less dependent


12
on working the land and the salt-pans of the surrounding plantations. Jansen was therefo-
re called ‘tata di pober’, father of the poor (Latour 1940:25). He also promoted a form of
fishing which was applied by other fishermen in Westpunt and placed two men at the head
of the business."



The Union of Marriage
A sphere of life in which the Church played an important role was that of marriage and
family life. Once free, couples were no longer denied the possibility of legal marriage. The
issue then became: how to encourage people to embrace this new possibility?
     Previously, marriage had only been of concern to the Catholic Church; now it was also
the concern of the State. It would, however, take some time before both institutions would
agree on the way marriage would be recognized legally and religiously. For a long time fol-
lowing emancipation the Church continued to consecrate the relationship between a man
and a woman in the same fashion as it had during slavery. Using the so-called ‘salta garo-
ti’ method it had been able to consecrate many relationships between enslaved men and
women, even though the State did not recognize the legality of this union. It was official-
ly called a ‘matrimonia clandestina’. Following emancipation, the salta garoti continued to
be performed by the Church, now in a more open way. However, now that slavery had
ended and the law prohibiting enslaved from marriage was no longer valid, it was of
importance to the State that the salta garoti was conducted after the official marriage cere-
mony, in the presence of the Council of Police.
     The initial step taken by the colonial government was to gain information on this mat-
ter through a letter to the district masters, enquiring into the willingness of those cohabi-
ting to enter into a legal marriage. The governor and the vicar apostolic came to an agree-
ment, which entailed that the latter would direct his priests to encourage people to marry
legally. The Roman Catholic Church welcomed this initiative by the State to further legal
marriage among Afro-Curagaoans. In turn, the district masters had to create facilities for
conducting these marriages.”
     Despite these arrangements, the priests remained in conflict with the State due to their
limited authority regarding this issue. At one point the State even accused the Church of
propagating resistance among the lower class against legal marriage. In relation to this
accusation, in 1866 the government sent a confidential letter to all district masters to assess
whether in their districts the Catholic priests were conducting marriages before they were
legalized by civil law.” This came to light due to an accusation made by the Protestant
Council of Churches that the custom of being married solely in Church was being adopt-
ed by people of the middle class. They were concerned that this practice would also pro-
liferate among the elite.”
     The replies the governor received from the district masters revealed that the way in
which the marriage ceremony was conducted varied from district to district. For instance,
the master of the third district reported that couples were married in Church after their
relationship had been consolidated by law.” In contrast, the priest responsible for marria-
ge in the town district proved less diligent in stimulating couples to marry by civil law.


                                                                                           153
In general, children who were born within the union of salta garoti were registered as ille-
gitimate by the State, whereas at their baptism in the Catholic Church they were registered
as filus legitimus and their parents as a married couple by the Catholic priest.” This conse-
quently led to confusion regarding the status of these children in society. This would mani-
fest itself, for example, when they could not inherit any possessions from their father. A
commissioner reported that in his district the priest had begun encouraging people from
his parish to marry legally, after learning that a woman and her children had experienced
problems in inheriting the possessions of her deceased husband whom she had married in
Church but had failed to record the marriage legally. He further stated that priests were
frustrated that children of couples who were only married in Church were registered as
illegitimate children.
     The Roman Catholic clergy made the government aware of the numerous difficulties a
couple had to overcome in order to legalize their relationship. First of all, the relatively
high cost of marriage made it unattainable for many. In order to get married legally, one
had to pay a certain amount of money for stamps, legal dues, a permit from the governor
of the colony and the fee for the civil servant who performed the marriage ritual.” Those
who could prove that they could not afford this, were exempt from these charges. How-
ever, this search for a legal aid certificate was very difficult and time consuming. Moreover,
the assessment of who was poor was done arbitrarily. Eight years after emancipation, the
then vicar apostolic van Ewijk complained to the governor that on Banda Bou people were
refused the possibility of marrying free of charge. A priest in that area had a list of names
of 139 couples who wanted to get married legally, but were unable to procure the necessa-
ry funding (Brenneker 1986:269). A priest who was asked by the University of Leiden in
the Netherlands to record the lives of the creoles on the island, wrote that some civil ser-
vants refused to conduct a marriage unless the couple paid them an extra amount of
money (O.S.T. 1891:296-7).
     The financial burden of a civil marriage has often been mentioned in the petitions to
perform marriage at ‘perculum in mora’. The term ‘perculum in mora’ describes a marria-
ge ceremony that needed to be conducted urgently as one of the partners was very ill and
likely to die. Often these couples had lived together for many years and had several child-
ren. Priests complained that even in these cases the government was slow to react. One dis-
trict master in the outer district requested, in the common interest, to create proper faci-
lities so that couples in his district could be married more rapidly in ‘perculum in mora,
regardless of the financial position of the couple.”
     Difficulties were reported when people had to submit the official papers necessary for
marriage, such as a birth certificate. Names and surnames were often misspelled. Very
often official documents were incorrect and had to be corrected through the agency of the
court of Justice. Individuals petitioned for the correction of these faulty registrations. Such
was the case of Antoine Martis, whose name was written in the civil register as Antonie
Martis and who petitioned for it to be changed again to Antoine. This was also the case of
Gerard Faustin Gerardo, who before emancipation carried the name ‘van Sek’ but at eman-
 cipation received the name Gerardo. He requested to be van Sek again.”
     People sought to record their correct name, especially if their heritage rights were
threatened.” Former slaves such as Rostina Hydsinth Zurum and Eduard Jasmin, both



154
children of Rosa, petitioned to receive the name of Semmers, the name of their deceased
father.” Children born out of wedlock petitioned to carry the name of their father, as they
had always unofficially been called by that name. If no objections to the names were
published, the petitioners would be granted their requests. The unwed children of Jewish
fathers in particular often requested to carry the family name of their father. In most cases
no objection was made to these requests. There are many cases in which children asked to
carry the Jewish family name of Maduro and also received it. This is in contrast to the peti-
tions of unwed children of the white Protestant group, who were denied from carrying the
family names of their fathers.
    The confusion regarding people’s names was also caused by the fact that most mid-
wives at that time could not read or write, which posed a problem when registering a child
after birth. It depended, then, on how the government officials wrote down the name of the
baby. In addition, civil servants themselves made mistakes in the spelling of names and sur-
names, causing changes in surnames in the course of time.” For example, Petronia would
be spelled Petrona, Ursula would be written as Oersula, Cijntje would become Seintje etc.
In that way family members sometimes carried different surnames. This even caused con-
fusion between siblings, as due to this misspelling brothers or sisters would be registered
with different surnames. For example, in a contract for a piece of land in the western part
of the island, the petitioner named Lucien Alberto signed his name Lucien Albertus. The
informant Yeta Albertus explained why her name was written in various ways.


Mester skibi mi nomber ku ‘us’ na final. E fam     You have to write my name at the end with ‘us.
 aki ta konosi na Westpunt, el a bin brua          This family name is also known in Westpunt,
 akibanda. Mi a tende ku un tata tabatin 12 yu    but has been mixed up here. I learnt that a
 homber, i nan a kambia nan fam. Ora un di e      father had 12 sons, and that they changed the
yu hombernan a nase, nan a skibi e fam ku ‘oe,    family name. At the birth of one of the sons, the
 i ora un otro yu a nase nan a skibié ku ‘o’ na   family name was written with ‘oe at the end,
final. Hopi brua.”                                while at the birth of another one it was written
                                                  with an ‘o’ at the end. Very confusing.


Well into the twentieth century government officials continued registering the names of
people incorrectly. For example in 1909, the Procurator General composed a list of two pages
with mistakes in the registration of names made by a district commissioner in that year.”
    The problems this could cause in later life were described by an informant in Banda
Bou, born in 1903:

S.V.: Tempu mi tabata bai kasa, tabatin brua-     S.V.: When I was going to get married there was
shon den mi fam.                                  some confusion about my surname.
R.A.: Kiko ke men ‘bruashor’ den e kaso aki?      R.A.: What do you mean by confusion?
S.V.: Ora mi a nase nan a dunami un fam, ku       S.V.: At birth they gave me a family name which
nos no sa ta ken su fam e ta. Tempu mi ker a      we did not know whose name it was. When I
kasa, nan mester a bai buska un hende ku taba-    wanted to get married they had to get someone
ta presente ora mi mama a hanami, pa bai          who was present when my mother gave birth to
Kranshi i deklará ku mi mama su nomber ta tal     me, to go to the Municipality and declare that
(tak                                              my mother’s name was so and so.


                                                                                               155
The Church also attempted to have its say in the choice of marriage partners. If the man
was a free mason, the marriage could not be consecrated. Other factors also played a role.
According to custom a young man had to be hard-working, ‘un homber trahadó’. He
should have a piece of land to build his house on before he would get married. Just as in
the rest of the Caribbean, any prospective son-in-law was always asked the question
whether he had already finished his home.” This showed that he could be responsible for
his future wife.


C.V.: Mi papa tabata biba na Porto Mari. Nos       C.V.: My father lived in Porto Mari. We went
a bai aya, nos a bint bek.                         there and came back.
R.A.: Sefiora su papa a keda biba aya?             R.A.: Your father stayed and lived there?
C.V.: Si, el a biba aya. E tabata kasd ku un       C.V.: Yes, he lived there. He was married with a
mucha muhé djaya. Mi wela tabata un muhé           girl from there. My grandmother was a very
trabahoso, e no tabata ke pa mi mama kasa ku       obstinate woman. She did not want my mother
e shon.                                            to marry the shon.
R.A.: Di kon e no a gusta?                         R.A.: Why did she not want that?
C.V.: E tempunan ayá no ta manera awor aki.        C.V.: It was different in those days. I think that
Mi ta kere ku e mama di e mucha homber 1           the mother of the man did not like the mother
mama di mi mama no tabata duna mashá.              of my mother. So she did not want that.
Wel e no tabata ke.
R.A.: ‘No tabata duna’ ke men ku nan no taba-      R.A.: This means that they did not like each
ta bai bon ku otro?                                other, they didn’t get along?
C.V.: E tempu ayá bo mama ta bisa e no ke e        C.V.: In those days, when your mother tells you
hende, bo ta obedesé. E no ta gusta e mama, e      that she does not like someone, you would listen
yu ta tende. E mama ke men miéntras su wowo        to her. The mother thinks that as long as she is
ta habri, e yu ei no ta kasa ku e homber ei. E     alive the child would not marry that man. The
mama a bisa shon, e buska su otro hende. No ta     mother told the shon to look for someone else.
manera aworaki. Ku e no ke, e no ke. E yu ta bai   Nowadays things are different. If she did not
tras di su mama.”                                  want it, it would not happen. And the child
                                                   would obey its mother.


In general respondents stated that family members had to know every detail about the
families of the prospective husband or wife. Any negative information regarding a mem-
ber of the family might have obstructed the marriage.


Bo mester a bai ku madrina, padrinu, yaya, ku      You had to go with your godmother, godfather,
tur kos ku bo tin ku bai kuné ora bo ta bai pidi   your yaya (nanny) and some next of kin when
man. Anto e mama di e hende (mucha muhé)           you wanted to ask for a girl’s hand. The mother
ku bo ke bai komprometé kuné, mester               of the one you wanted to court had to know you
konosébo bon. Bo mester ta trahadó, bo no          very well. You had to be a hard worker, not a
mester ta ladron, bo mester ta hende limpi.        thief, a clean person. Oh yes. When they accept
Sigur no. Bo tin ku komprometé, ora nan asep-      you for their daughter, then about five to six
tábo. Ke desir bo ta bishitá kas di e mucha        months or a little bit longer afterwards you
muhé pa sinku, seis luna, of alguitu mas, boso     would be engaged to her and then you and the
ya ta komprometé, anto despues bo ku e mama        girl's mother would have a talk. Formerly, ifyou



156
ta papia. Si bo bai kas di mama bai pidi man,      did not have your own house built yet, you
si bo no tin bo propio kas lantá, nan ta bisa ku   could not go to the house of the mother of the
bo tin ku lanta bo kas promé. Ora bo kasa den      girl you were in love with to ask for her hand.
kiko bo ta pon’é bo sefora?                        You had to have a house built first. Ifnot, when
Antes tur kos tabata mashá na òrdu. Awor aki       you got married, where would you put the
ta kon ku bai laga bai. Tempunan ayá, ku bo ta     woman? In the past everything was well organ-
bai kas di bo mucha muhé promé biaha, bo           ized. Not any longer. If for the first time you
mester bai ku bo padrinu, e padrinu ku a           were going to visit the home of the girl, you had
batisábo, bo yaya ku a kargabo, bo madrina di      to go with your godfather and godmother who
batisá, bo tata, bo mama, bo ruman... Bo tin ku    had baptized you, your yaya who had carried
avisá e hendenan siman padilanti ku bo ke bin      you to church, your father, mother, brother...
hasi bishita, pa duna di konosé, ke desir ku bo    You had to tell the people some weeks in
ta akudi ku nan yu. Anto e ora ei nan ta bai       advance that you were coming. They will find
mira kiko nan ta disidi. Nan mester mira ku bo     out whether the members of your family are
ta famia di bon hende. Ku bo no ta rasa di         good people. Whether you don’t have a thiefin
ladron. Ku bo no ta matadó di hende, promé ku      the family, or a killer, before they receive you in
nan risibi bo den nan kas.”                        their home.


According to some informants these rules mostly applied to those with a darker skin. In a
society where a lighter complexion was associated with better jobs, more status, beauty,
and civilized behaviour, parents were more flexible when a man with a lighter skin colour
sought their daughter’s hand in marriage.
    For the poor, the salta garoti had always been a convenient solution. An informant
described this as an event whereby a couple would, in their working clothes, go to the
home of the priest, who would ‘marry’ them in the presence of a witness. For the salta
garoti marriages people would dress modestly and incur few expenses, but this was not the
case for those combining both the legal and the Church marriages. As early as 1864 Kiste-
maker mentioned during a conversation with the Public Prosecutor of the King that one
of the bottlenecks in the marriage process was the fact that many people liked to dress for
the occasion but often lacked the funds to do so.” The lower class wanted to marry as
gracefully as the wealthy people (van der Gon Netcher 1868:510).
    Weddings became increasingly expensive events. Members of the black population
attempted to match the wedding customs of the white elite.” Effort was made to provide
entertainment for the guests as well (Schipper 1933:7). This is similar to what Fernando
Henriques has noted about weddings in Jamaica. “People must be entertained with music,
food, rum and champagne. In the eyes of a black person, to be married without these para-
phernalia would be no marriage at all.”



Punitive and Encouraging Acts
To discourage premarital sex and to promote monogamous marriage, the Roman Catho-
lic Church, under the leadership of vicar apostolic H.J.A. van Ewijk” vicar apostolic
between 1870-1886 — introduced punitive measures as well as rewards. The act of the ‘Pre-
sentashon di mucha’ (the presentation of the child) was among those encouraging


                                                                                                  157
marriage. Once a legitimate child was six weeks old, the mother could come to Church,
present it to the Virgin Mary and request the priest to bless the child, whereupon the priest
would pray the ‘benedictiones mulieris et infantis’ (Latour 1948a:308). An interviewee
recalled the following about such a blessing:

      Six weeks after a child was born, there would be a presentation. After six weeks you had
      to go to church, thank God for having been able to give birth to a healthy child. After
      you had given birth to a child, you were not allowed to go anywhere before you had gone
      to church first. You had to go and tell the priest that you wanted to present your child to
      the Virgin Mary. Sometimes the ‘yaya’ (a lady who carried the child at baptism) would
      also come along. The priest would receive you with your child and your candle and pres-
      ent your child to the Virgin Mary. I have done it with all my nine children.”

This presentation took into account the custom of mother and child staying indoors for
the first six weeks after birth, to protect both from harm.“            In this case, the Church
concurred with this custom. Indirectly, the popular class also used this ritual to invoke pro-
tection for the mother and the child through the Virgin Mary.
    Van Ewijk also introduced the custom distinguishing between children born of mar-
ried parents and those born out of wedlock. He introduced a two-tier system of baptism:
one for children born in lawful wedlock, conducted on a Sunday, at which both a god-
mother and a godfather were present (Latour 1945:440). They were called ‘yunan di klari-
dat’ (children of the light). Another system existed for children born out of wedlock, who
were baptized on a weekday, at dusk, before sunrise. They were called ‘yunan di skuridat’
(children of the dark) or ‘yunan di piká’ (children born in sin) or ‘yunan di diabel’ (child-
ren of the devil), or sometimes even ‘yunan di puta’ (children of a whore).42 During this
baptism ceremony the godfather was not allowed to be present, only a godmother. This
measure marked the beginning of a life-long stigmatization by the Church of children
born out of wedlock. Illegitimacy became then a shameful mark for the child.
    The mother of a child born out of wedlock, who went to a priest to set a date for the
baptism, was likely to be verbally castigated by the priest. An informant of mine, an
unwedded mother, who had gone to request the priest to baptize her child, described the
way he had behaved on that occasion:


Mi promé yunan tabata oochi. Mi no tabata            My first children were twins. I was not married.
kasd. Mi a bai puntra e pastor pa e batisá nan.      I went to ask the priest to baptize them. When I
Ora mi a puntr’é, el a kana bai, i kada biaha e      was requesting this to the priest, he walked
tabata dal porta sera den mi kara. Masha sla mi      away and every time I asked he slammed the
a hana di pastor ku blat di porta.”                  door in my face. I got many blows from him
                                                     with the door.

However, there were people who resisted this rule from its conception. Van Ewijk wrote the
following to the Prefect of the Propaganda Fide:




158
    It is unbelievable to hear how many people belonging to the free masonry, also
    Catholics and Protestants, opposed to this measure. They voiced their protest in some
    of the newspapers on the island and some allowed their child born out of wedlock to be
    baptized by a Protestant vicar.* [Translation R.M. Allen]

A few years later van Ewijk would again lament in a letter, dated 24 February 1880, that the
process introducing legal marriage was developing too slowly and that people continued
to live in a so-called immoral state, despite the Church’s best efforts. He attributed this to
the fact that it was still difficult to persuade the coloured class to first marry legally and
then marry in Church. Again the lack of facilities provided by the government, particular-
ly in the outer districts, was seen as a major factor hindering the popularity of legal mar-
riage. In town facilities were somewhat better.” Sometimes the Church authorities would
openly complain about what they considered to be feeble efforts made by the government.
    The Roman Catholic Church forwarded various strategies to establish monogamous
marriage among Afro-Curacaoans. They used different methods to attain their goal.
Besides measures mentioned previously, the Church began burying people who had
cohabited out of wedlock in the ‘chiké, a Papiamentu word for pigsty. The ‘chiké was often
situated at the back of the cemetery and was on unconsecrated ground. In this way the
Church brought shame on the family of the deceased, who held the Catholic burial in high
regard. In order to avoid this shame, they would sometimes turn to the Protestant Church
to conduct the burial.
    Another strategy employed by priests was to regularly visit families in their homes and
to teach them about marriage and family life. According to an informant, ‘they would
come to your home and advise a man and a woman who lived together as a couple to get
married (drecha bida). Some did, some did not?” Sometimes people who had been living
together and who were admitted into the hospital run by the Catholic Church were pres-
surized to marry (van der Mark 1999:223).
    Any individual living on mission land who violated the code of behaviour faced expul-
sion. Priests would also request district masters to chase individuals from government land
when they fell foul of their rules and norms. In this way an entire family could be outcast
by the Church.
    The impact of these missionary activities can be seen in the data in Graph 1, indicat-
ing the number of people who were married legally and those who were married in the
Catholic Church. Records of the number married in Church only began in the year 1875.




                                                                                             159
      Graph 6.1 Legal marriage vs Church marriage

                   SVS                                                        SS                          al
                                                                                                               |




                   200


              re                  {|
              o    150            7                   i                                A     DR                                          =
             =                    A               |\                                   pW        We WWS        || Legal marriage
              E                   y                   ral             ‚                ne           Reed              :                      ;
                                  44             Ne     ay                                                {||         Church manage
              re            iNs
                                      Gees,
                                      stint Sati
                                                    Ly
                                                    a
                                                      li
                                                      Z    i WA
                                                                                                               |                                 =
             FL                        4 \ in               Met                vj
                          JA Li           \ i     |         \             ¢    \{
                          q Ld            ie es                                    \
                    SO tH                 BY


                     Crt a            i        SOO.
                                                 I BU iGt a =
                         BO ten eo              len             cee   Mey     en  es)       Tes cl  ley        ies
                         N&O                    WO              A     A       NO            Oa
                         SER
                         ce ne
                                en
                                re
                                                en
                                                cml
                                                                GER
                                                                =
                                                                      NEEN
                                                                      re
                                                                              Wen Kern
                                                                              —_  —
                                                                                            Ke es
                                                                                            ec
                                                                                                TEN ce
                                                                                                    EN         Wen
                                                                                                               cool




                                                                      Year

      Source: Koloniale Verslagen 1875-1917



This graph shows that in the course of time the number of legal marriages increased. In a
sense it goes against the complaints of the Roman Catholic Church that the lack of facili-
ties encouraged people to marry only in Church.

Graph 6.2 gives an overview of children born between 1863-1917. The term ‘registered as
illegitimate’ refers to children born out of legal wedlock.

      Graph 6.2 Number of children born and number of children born illegitimate




                                                                                                                          illegitimate




             children
             of
             Number




      Source: Koloniale Verslagen 1863-1917




160
Here it is also visible that the number of children registered as illegitimate decreases over
the years. Their number would have been even lower if it had been taken into account that
the State and the Church employed different registration criteria. At baptism, a child born
out of legal wedlock was registered by the clergy as legitimate, while a government official
would register it as illegitimate. This implies that the Church recognized a durable rela-
tionship and the presence of a father in the life of the child, which the State denied.” Eva
Abraham van der Mark noted (1973) that the number of children born out of legal wed-
lock decreased after the arrival of Shell on the island. However, Graph 6.2 indicates that
around 1910 the decrease had already set in.
     Over the years, Church and elite complained about the fact that the number of child-
ren born out of wedlock remained high. It was generally believed that one could measure
the level of civilization and development by assessing the percentage of children born in
lawful wedlock.” In 1902 a priest commented that ‘the mission became so ashamed when
they saw that in 1901, of the 1004 children born in that year, 617 were born out of wed-
lock. What a poor impression this will give people in the Netherlands about the state of
morality in Curacao.” Some blamed this high figure on the failure of the Roman Catholic
Church in its civilizing mission. Priests were accused of not having done enough. Even
though a Protestant historian such as Hamelberg adhered to this view, he still recognized
the efforts made by the Roman Catholic Church in a letter to the Amigoe in 1904. Accord-
ing to Hamelberg, if it were not for the Roman Catholic Church, people in the outer dis-
tricts would be at a loss. He stated that “Thanks to their contribution, these people were
not left to their fate, as they were by the government.”
     Gradually the beliefs regarding illegitimacy shaped by the Catholic Church were accep-
ted by the people and illegitimacy began to carry a stigma. Names such as ‘yu teduki; ‘yu
di pika’, yu di porko or ‘yu di diabel’ and ‘yu di puta’” became part of the daily discourse.
Children who were born out of wedlock could not later be ordained as priests or be trai-
ned to work as schoolteachers etc.
     The Church continually stressed family life as a standard for morality. Legitimate child-
ren whose families participated in Church matters were considered a ‘bon famia’ (good
family). In its attempts to spread the word among the population, a weekly series of life
stories was published in Papiamentu newspapers; initially in La Union, published by the
Gezellenblad van de Sint Josef (Club San Hose), but when this periodical ceased to exist, the
stories would continue in La Cruz” They concerned everyday life, focused on the morals
and values preached and ran alongside news items. Naturally, the success of this method
depended heavily on the level of literacy within the population. To spread the message,
those able were asked to read these stories aloud to the illiterate. Missionaries played an
important role in the process of writing and publishing in Papiamentu.
     In these didactic articles, often written in a simple narrative form, priests attempted to
make their moral teachings more accessible to the people. In several stories focusing on fam-
ily life and the significance of fatherhood, they stressed virtues such as thriftiness, sobriety
and the systematic accumulation of wealth.” This is illustrated in the following story, com-
paring three types of men, with the last one being used as the standard for behavior. One was
a husband who worked as a mason earning about seven and a half guilders per week. This
was added to the money his wife earned with a small business; their income totaled ten


                                                                                             161
guilders a week. However, this man wasted his money on the lottery, drinking, smoking and
partying and failed in his duties as a father. The second man was eighteen years old and
earned five to six guilders per week. He behaved in a similar way. His mother, a widower, had
to work in order to take care of him. In contrast, the third man, even though he liked to
drink, would every Saturday give some of his wages to his wife as well as saving part of it.
Due to his thriftiness, they were eventually able to buy a piece of land.”
     Other stories related morality to work ethics. Missionaries wrote and used stories and
newspaper articles to criticize idleness and to promote a work ethic in order to ensure the
well-being of families. The theme of work ethics was discussed in a series of articles dur-
ing the year 1889, which began with the definition of a good Catholic worker. According
to the author this was a person who worked by the sweat of his forehead.” Furthermore,
the author compared free work to slavery and stated that the obligation to work does not
imply that you are forced to work against your will. Work is a divine activity. A worker has
to fulfill his task as this is the will of God.
     Another aspect of the Church’s mission was its effort to eradicate alcohol abuse among
the popular class, highlighting the negative effects within the family. Alcohol consumption
among the enslaved was high, as was pointed out in the emancipation letter of vicar apos-
tolic Kistemaker.” A male informant sang to me the following song and expressed the
theme as follows:

      Presently, it is not as before. Formerly they had a reason to sing it. They used to sing it,
      because we used to overdo it. When we arrived somewhere, instead of bringing our
      money home to our wives, we would waste it on alcohol. When we drank too much, our
      wives did not get any money.”

He then sang:

Rom ta dushi?                                        Is Rum sweet?
Rom ta dushi?                                        Is Rum sweet?
Pe maldito buraché                                   For the cursed drunkard
Rom ta dushi?                                        Is Rum sweet?


This was an orally transmitted version of the song, composed by Father Poeisz, to warn
against the effects of alcohol.” The fact that it became an oral tradition and that it was sung
by several of my informants, demonstrates that the use of songs as an educative device had
some success. These songs were virtuous and didactic and aimed to change the negative
behaviour of the popular class (van Panhuys 1934:315).
    The reality of alcoholism should be taken seriously. Most of the time workers received
rum as part of their wages. Alcoholism was one of the causes of aggression among Afro-
Curacaoans, often in the form of domestic violence (van Soest 1977:18). Priests used all
types of didactic devices to discourage alcoholism. The following was published in the
newspaper La Cruz.




162
 Rom ta dushi? Le ta dushi.                     Is Rum sweet? It must be sweet
 P’e maldito buraché                            For the cursed drunkard
 Koe ta bandona famia                           Who abandons his family
 Pa bat bebe com ke kié                         To drink how he wants
 Rom ta dushi? De ta dushi                      Is Rum sweet? It must be sweet
 P’e perverso buraché                           For the perverse drunkard
 Koe pa causa dje bebida                       That for the cause of the drink
 Pa toer hende’a desprecié                     Already everyone despises him
 Rom ta dushi!                                 Rum ts sweet!
 Ta palabra                                    That is the word
Dje malbado buraché                            Of the wicked drunkard
Koe ta camna panja sushi                       Who walks with dirty clothes?
I toer hende ta harié                          Moreover, everyone laughs at him
Rom ta dushi! Rom ta dushi!                    Rum is sweet! Rum is sweet!
Pobercito buraché                              Poor drunkard
El a drenta toer e shapnan                     He went to all the bars
Bebe e cos pa venené                           To drink the drink that poisons him
Rom ta dushi! Rom ta dushi!                    Rum is sweet! Rum is sweet!
Mir’e pober buraché                            Look at the poor drunkard
C’un zapatoe sin nanishi                       With shoes without caps
Sin tin placa pa dreché                        Without money to fix them
Bo ta kere rom ta dushi                        Do you believe that Rum is sweet
Desgraciado buraché?                           Disgraceful drunkard?
Drei bo mira bo mes curpa                      Turn around and look at your own body
Na ki estado b’a poné                          In which state you have put it
Ai no kere rom ta dushi                        Oh, don’t think that Rum is sweet
Pretencioso buraché                            Pretentious drunkard
Corda bon di bo famia                          Think about   your family
Na ki estado b’a largé                         In what state you left it
Aleha bo fo’ dje bicio                         Kick the habit
Lastimoso buraché                              Pitiful drunkard
Rom ta causa di toer maloe                     Rum is the cause of all evil
Hui, hui for di djé.”                          Fly, fly away from it.




Creating Respectable Citizens
For the Roman Catholic Church, educating young Afro-Curagaoans was an important ele-
ment in instilling respectability. Education entailed teaching young people Christian val-
ues and norms. One year before emancipation, a priest wrote:

    Young people need school education alongside religious education. We do not need
   priests who are only acquainted with our mission, and who do not recognize and sup-
   ply the need of the Negroes. We lack instructors and find hundreds of children in the
   different parishes growing up with no school education at all.”



                                                                                           163
Following emancipation, the number of children attending mission schools increased
(Koloniaal Verslag 1864). But the Roman Catholic Church depended on a subsidy from the
government enabling it to broaden its education programme among the black lower class.
Reluctantly it had to accommodate certain governmental interests if it wanted to continue
its civilizing mission. This led to its independent position being compromised. Even though
a general decree regarding emancipation stipulated that schools run by the Church needed
to be encouraged and supported along with those run by the State, the grants given by the
government to religious education were small and many schools were in a state of decay.
Thus one of the greatest obstacles faced by the Roman Catholic mission on Curacao was
funding. For example, in the early 1880s the four public schools on the island received a
total of 18.000 guilders per year, while the seven Catholic schools received an allowance of
only 7.000 guilders. These four public schools, each with approximately five hundred stu-
dents, had four teachers, each with three or four assistant teachers, whereas the Roman
Catholic schools had fifteen hundred pupils in seven schools, with only eighteen nuns as
teachers.” Missionaries would constantly express hope tinged with frustration when
dealing with this situation. Often they appealed to Dutch Catholics in the Catholic maga-
zines distributed in the Netherlands, requesting money to either build a school, a church
or a home for the priest on the island.
    Education involved more than merely teaching children to read and write. It also
entailed teaching them moral standards. This was clearly stated in an article in the Amigoe,
in which the author expressed that:

      Education, as an instrument of developing knowledge, cannot exist ‘... without moral-
      ly forming the heart and mind’. All discussions as to whether school should give moral
      ‘teaching’ are a waste of time and words. The school is a powerful element in the edu-
      cation and therefore in moral formation as well.”

In its attempt to create respectable citizens, the Church paid special attention to young
women. Priests would frequently write about the various kinds of menace young women
encountered in society, hampering them in leading a moral and decent life.
    The town in particular was considered an area of low morality. Even though those
living in town were generally believed to be more civilized than their rural counterparts,
priests were often alarmed by the immoral life style prevalent in these urban communities.
They therefore diligently worked to elevate the moral standards of this group (Latour
1953:47).
    Town and country were communicating vessels as many impoverished people, espe-
cially young women, moved to town in the hope of finding work. Their plight made them
vulnerable to exploitation and they were likely to become victim to this moral decay.
Therefore the priests considered them in need of special attention (Latour 1952:23). The
aforementioned priest who published under the initials O.S.T. denounced the practice of
young women being sexually exploited by their employers.“ The apostolic vicar G.M. A.M.
Vuylsteke, in his pastoral letter of 5 February 1917 regarding morality, also addressed this
issue. The case of the daughter of James Hooi, which was presented by the priest of West-
punt in a letter of 28 July 1917 to the district master, again illustrates this problem.
                                                                                         The


164
daughter of Hooi was made pregnant by the son of her employer, who denied responsibi-
lity. Her father requested the aid of the guardians’ supervisory board in obtaining custody
of the child.”
     Girls between fourteen and sixteen years of age could become members of an organi-
zation named ‘The Legion ofVirgin Mary’ or Kongregashi. Some were chosen by the nuns
while others volunteered. The girls called kongrenis had to be unblemished. They had to
display high moral conduct, which related to their actions and the way they dressed. They
were tightly supervised and constrained, isolated from boys their own age and could not
participate in any activities other than those organized by the Catholic Church. They were
not allowed to participate in local popular cultural events and happenings, such as the
tambú and ocho dia, representations of an immoral and pagan way of life. Their solitary
life was an important characteristic of their respectability. The ethnologist Juliana, who
interviewed several former kongrenis, was told the following by an informant:

A.M.: Si bo ta kongrenis, nan mirabo un              A.M.: If you are a kongrenis (member of a
kaminda ku nan no ta gusta, nan ta bai, bai          Roman Catholic congregation) and people see
bisa pastor. Mi tanta a kontami ku e ku mi          you somewhere they do not like, they will go
mama tabata kongrenis. Un hende a bai bisa           and tell the priest. My aunt told me that she and
pastor ku el a mira un mucha muhé meskos ku          my mother were kongrenis. Someone went and
mi tanta na ocho dia. Nan a bai, bai bisa riba       told the priest that she saw a girl just like my
nan.                                                 aunt at an ocho dia. She went and told the
                                                    priest.
E.J.: Bai bisa pastor.                              E.J.: Went and told the priest.
A.M.: Ku nan a mira nan na ocho dia. Pastor a       A.M: That they saw my mother and her sister
saka nan tur dos for di kongregashi.                at an ocho dia. The priest chased both of them
                                                    from the Kongregashi.
E.J.: Bo no por a bai ni ocho dia?                  E.J.: You could not even participate in the ocho
                                                    dia?
 A.M.: Ni ocho dia kantá bo no por bai, ni baile    A.M.: Not even an ocho dia kantá, no dancing
 di plaka. Ni bo no por a bai tambu. Nan weta       party for which one had to pay money, no
 bo, nan ta bai bisa pastor anto ta sakabo for di   tambu. If they saw you, and they went to tell the
 kongregashi. Asina tabata tempu ayd. Ku bo ta      priest, he would chase you from the Kongre-
kongrenis, asina ei. Bo tin ku bai misa, bo por     gashi. It was like that in those days. You had to
 bai unfiesta den dia, ma anochi bo no por ta na    go to church; you could go to a feast during the
fiesta. Niun. Ahan, mané, si tin balia di ka’t      day, but not at night. None whatsoever. If they
musika den dia, pa fiesta, bo por bai. Pero si ta   had a party of the kaha di músika you could go.
kos di plaka, fiesta ku bo ta paga plaka, bo no     But nothing that had to do with money. They
por bai. Mashá estrikto bida di kongrenis taba-     were very strict. Nowadays there are no kongre-
ta. Ma awor mi ke ku no tin kongrenis mes mas.      nis anymore. You had to go to Kongregashi with
Bo tin ku bai kongregashi ku bo medaya, ku bo       your medal and your blue ribbon around your
sinta blou na bo garganta.”                         neck,


Juliana related to me that some of these kongrenis had aspired to become nuns, but were
impeded from doing so because they had been born out of wedlock. He had interviewed
several women who in their old age were still proud that they never married and had
remained virgins.


                                                                                                  165
                                                                                      became
The kongrenis were expected to remain virgins until married. Their wedding days
highly ceremonial events, celebrating the devout lives they  had  been living. These ceremo-
nies were called bini krea, taken from the song ‘Veni Creator’ which was sung by the par-
ticipating choir. The attitude of the other women towards these kongrenis ranged from
admiration to contempt. Some considered the lives of the kongrenis to be dull and res-
trictive. Gossip was fuelled by the suspicion that some kongrenis had received the honour
of Veni Creator despite becoming pregnant before marriage. Due to their close relations
with the priests, people did not always trust them. They often accused them of gossiping
and relaying information about people in the neighbourhood to the priests. The following
tambu song is a satire about one of these girls and accuses her of illicit sex — even though
she plays the refined lady. The act of sexual relationship is being described as the sucking
of a lollipop.

Senorita fini                                   Refined ladies
Muchanan di pastor                              Children of the priest”
Nan ta chupa lolipop                            They suck on the lollipop
Anto benta e palu afó                           And throw the stick away
Pero mucha desidido                             But the determined ones
no tin kuenta di nada                           Do not care about anything
Nan ta chupa e lolipop                          They suck the lollipop
Warda epalu te mafian                           And save the stick till the next day
Koro:                                           Chorus:
Chupa lolipop                                   Suck on the lollipop
Tambe guli su papel                             Swallow its rapping as well
Chupa lolipop                                   Suck on the lollipop
Tambe guli su papel.”                           Swallow its rapping as well


For women abiding by the rules laid down by the priests, there were advantages. The Roman
Catholic Church created possibilities for local women to teach as non-qualified school-
teachers in nurseries and primary schools and they were often given work by others on the
recommendation of the priests. The Church stressed the necessity for those who taught at
school to possess high moral standards; these standards also extended to their families.
    Oral history shows that remaining a virgin until marriage was generally accepted as
respectable behaviour within the community. Most interviewees stressed the fact that
young women should marry as virgins because ‘Strea ku sali trempan, ta drenta trempan’
(Stars which rise soon, will also fade quickly). The community judged young women
according to whether they had retained their virginity. The proverb ‘Mi n’ke kashu sin
kashipete’ (I do not want a kashew fruit without its nut), meaning I do not want to marry
a woman who is not a virgin, expresses this.
       Women were educated to be domestic and pure. In a lawsuit in 1871, Virgilius, a con-
ductor of a ferry boat, was sentenced to jail because he had pushed Juan, a farmer, into the
water. Juan had reprimanded Pieternella, who came from a good family, for associating
herself with Virgilius, Juan had stated this after having scolded her for walking alone on
the streets at 8 o'clock in the evening.”


 166
The expectation of women is confirmed by the following narration:


Ora bo ta sali, bo mester bai ku yaya pa mirabo,   When you went out, you had to go with a yaya
pa tira bista. Tabata un tempu konservador.        to look after you. Those were times when people
Dia mi ta’a mucha yon, tin hopi kos ku mi no       were socially very strict with their children.
tabata mete aden. Bo no mag. Esun ku bo            When I was a young girl, I did not engage in
hende grandi ke so. Bo no por a mira tambú, bo     many things. You were not allowed. Only what
no por a mira seú, bo no por a mira nada.          your elders wanted. You were not allowed to go
Reserva. Ora bo hende grandi ta bai, si bo ke bo   and watch a tambú, or a seú, nothing. Reserved.
ta para djaleu mira un koi mira. Pero drent’é      When adults go you may go with them and
gon                                                watch from a distance. But you could not par-
                                                   ticipate.


Among the popular class there were several divinations through which one could see
whether a woman was still a virgin. When a man wanted to know this, he would look at
her and then look at a flower. If the flower was still flowering, she would be a virgin, if it
wilted, she was not. Another sign was conveyed in the way she would stand up. Only if she
would put her left foot first, she was a virgin (Brenneker 1961:123).
    Typical is a court case brought before the judge in 1872, in which a seventeen year old
Cura¢aoan girl defended her name after having been accused of being a prostitute on the
island of St. Thomas, and then on Curagao.”’ A woman denounced a man who sang the
following song:

Wilhelmina mi ruman,                               Wilhelmina, my sister
No kulpa mi kunado                                 Don’t blame my brother in law
Kulpa shon Lucien                                  Blame shon Lucien
ku tin korant di bo mocedat                        Who can inform all about your virginity.”


The following tambú song expresses the importance of women preserving their virginity,
while at the same time attempting to avoid gossip.

Tur kos bo a konta mama                            You have told mother everything
Pakiko bo wbisa mama                               Why didn’t you tell mother
Ku lampi a pèrdè su balon.                         That the lamp has lost its lampshade.
Tende kiko e shishi di                             Listen what the tramp 1s saying
Cu su yu si ta nifia                               That her daughter is still a virgin
mar’e sabi ku galina a pone                        if only she knew that the hen has laid an egg
te ku ne a klòk.”                                  and that it has even hatched


The following tambú song is a manifestation of shame for the family of a girl who has lost
her virginity. The father of the girl takes the man whom he accuses of deflowering his
young daughter to the district master. The accused admits that he indeed had sexual rela-
tions with the girl, but claims that at the time she had already lost her virginity.



                                                                                               167
Mener de Leeuw                                     Mister de Leeuw
ma kome karni                                      I have eaten the meat
wesu si mi nsa di dje                              but I don’t know anything about the bone


The different treatment of the two sexes by the parents and particularly the protective
stance towards the daughter is illustrated in the following song. Mothers protected the vir-
ginity of their daughters before marriage. Here the protection of the mother is rejected by
the daughter.

Mama n’ke pa mi bai aki                            Mother don’t want me to go here
Mi mama n’ke pa mi bai aya                         My mother don’t want me to go there
Mama por serami den un kashi di glas               Mama can lock me up in a glass cabinet
Mand’é den kombentu serka ser”                     and send it to the sisters in the convent




Creating a Work Ethic
The Church also paid attention to the morality of young men. A priest referred to them
specifically in his remarks on the civilizing influence of Roman Catholic religion. He
pointed out that the

      Negroes of San Willibrordus have become different people. It is easy to understand the
      persistent effort required on the part of the priests so that these black boys develop in
      such a way that they become respectful members of society. We may compare this place
      to another, where people are living who are completely wild, where even cannibalism
      exists, where people live and die like animals.”

Several organizations were established to educate boys. The Sint Jozef Fellowship, popu-
larly called Club San Hose, was founded on 29 October 1882 in Pietermaai by the priest of
the parish, with the principle aim of teaching boys a trade. The club gave its pupils the
opportunity to support themselves and to eventually become responsible husbands and
fathers. In order to achieve this, the organization taught the trades of masonry, carpentry,
tailoring and shoemaking (Latour 1952:50). Members who lived according to the fellow-
ship’s values were favoured, as the organization rented pieces of land and built houses for
its members. The cultural influence of the Church on the fellowship was seen when on 1
July 1883 its members brought a serenade to the governor, while parading in mediaeval
costume from their club at Pietermaai to Scharloo, the governor’s home (Latour 1952:22).
    With the orphanage for young boys established at Santa Rosa in the east of the island, help
was available for boys from the countryside. This orphanage was a centre for young boys
without families who could learn a craft and be given an education. The boys were taught to
be musicians, shoe-makers, tailors, cabinet-makers, carriage-makers or carpenters.”” The
Church received orders for carpentry from places such as Venezuela and Suriname.
   Growing to maturity involved learning to assume responsibilities believed to be part of
manhood. By ‘building a dam against laziness and unemployment which result in poverty


168
and immorality, in dehumanizing the family and neglect of the education, the Church
intended to instill in these boys what was expected of them as future husbands and fathers.
It also helped people who were unable to perform their religious obligations (Latour
 1952:51). The Church aided young men in progressing towards the possibility of starting a
family and in preventing the belief that ‘nice young girls would remain unmarried, as they
were unable to find decent young men to secure a happy married life’ (Latour 1952:51).
     Often individual priests invested much time and effort in teaching trades to young
men. The construction of churches was utilized as an excellent opportunity to teach boys
from the parish a trade. This occurred, for example, in the building of the churches in Sint
Willibrordus and Westpunt (Latour 1952:13).
     The Church remained responsible for the pupils’ conduct until they came of age. After this
period the priests were often dismayed at the conduct of the boys and frustrated by their lack
of influence over them (Latour 1952:22). Despite their desire to keep the young men within
the community, they were powerless to stop them from, for example, emigrating. Young men
would often emigrate as a survival strategy, but it was also an important rite of masculinity.
     The Roman Catholic Church would continuously campaign against the emigration of
young males from the island, citing this as one of the factors hampering their spiritual
development. The missionaries were sufficiently close to this group to be aware of the dis-
appointment the migrants often experienced. People found adaptation to their new sur-
roundings difficult and upon their return would be impoverished. The clergy often used
these examples of misfortune to deter others from leaving (La Cruz, 29 August and 14
November 1917). Emigration also placed a large group of young people beyond the reach
of the clergy. This distressed the priests, for whom social control was essential in their civ-
ilizing mission. In that way, even the positive results of migration, when people returned
with money, were negatively portrayed as fuelling the idea of the black working class being
preoccupied with the material world, such as clothing, music and play.
    One of the songs about migration collected by Juliana and Brenneker relates to men
who in the mid-nineteenth century emigrated to Tucacas in Venezuela to work in the cop-
per mines. The song states that these men, although having returned with a lot of money
and expensive clothes, were uncouth. For that reason, they were called Luango’s or
Guene’s.” As previously stated, both terms initially referred to the places of origin of the
enslaved but over the years had begun to denote negative or primitive behaviour.


 Tukaka a pari Guem,                              Tucacas has given birth to people from Guinea,
 trupa di Luangu                                 a troup of Luango’s
 Tukaka a pari Guemi,                             Tucacas has given birth to people from Guinea,
esta Luangunan!                                  meaning Luango’s!
Bo mama ta Luangu,                                Your mother is a Luango,
famia di Luangu                                  family of Luango
Rasa di Luangu                                   Luango race                                .
Tukaka a pari Guent.”                            Tucacas has given birth to people from Guinea


This song seems to condemn emigrants who returned devoid of morals and links this to the
acquired behaviour of those returning to the traits of ethnic African groups. The disdain


                                                                                                169
shown in this song suggests the idea that migrating elsewhere in the region leads to re-Afri-
canization or, in this particular case, to a reluangonization of the black population of
Curacao. It underlines once more why the clergy, among other groups, was against people
leaving the island, as they would be exposed or re-exposed to cultural influences negative
to the civilizing mission.



Response to the Civilizing Mission
The teachings of the Roman Catholic priests were referred to with the term ‘Lei di pastor’,
‘the rules imposed by the priests’. The fact that these teachings were compared with the law
indicates the power evoked by their words. Afro-Curacaoans addressed priests using the
term ‘shon’, as they had done with the slave-owners.
    Their response to the ‘Lei di pastor’ is complex and does not adhere to one interpreta-
tion. Afro-Curacaoans originated from many diverse African countries. During slavery,
many more social divisions became established among the enslaved and the freed com-
munity. These divisions would endure following emancipation, according to criteria such
as origin, skin colour, area of domicile etc.
    The rapid growth in congregations following emancipation did not necessarily equate
to a full acceptance of faith. The recently freed were motivated to join the Church for
various reasons, which did not always coincide with those preferred by the missionaries.
Some accepted Catholicism, but challenged the Church whenever they disagreed with its
rules. As mentioned earlier, some Catholics reacted to the discrimination made at baptism
against children born out of wedlock by baptizing their child in the Protestant Church.
The Catholic Church denounced this opportunistic acceptance of the competing Christian
denomination. It was also noted that some blacks were only Catholic in name, as in the
proverb ‘Chimina a yega porta di San Juan i lubidá misa katóliko’ (Chimina arrived at the
gate of the plantation of San Juan and forgot the Catholic Church).”
    The Church was associated by some with poverty and was called the Church of the
poor.” Protestants and also some members of the lower class would criticize the fact that
priests used images of poor black people to appeal to readers abroad in order to collect
money for their activities. Some Catholics went against this negative labeling of the black
people on the island. Some considered that their involvement with the Church affected
their social standing (Latour 1952:15).
    Other Afro-Curacaoans were devout Catholics and lived according to the rules laid
down by the missionaries. For some of these people the Church offered a status above that
of their peers and they would receive benefits accordingly. For example, some Afro-
Curacaoans who had learnt to read and write and lived a respectable life, attained leading
positions in a funeral organization called the ‘sitter.* Or they could be granted a piece of
land from the Church in order to build a house and so become independent from land
owners. A good parishioner could even count on the help of the Church in legal matters.
    It seems that women were more receptive to the teachings of the Roman Catholic
Church than men. A priest commented on this when he wrote in 1877:




170
   Already at this moment there is a core group of god-fearing people, whom we can set
   as an example. Also more and more, there are people who are ashamed to commit
   crime, especially women.”

This different response to the Catholic Church is illustrated in Table 6.2. This Table gives
an insight into the participation rate of men and women at the obligatory Easter Confes-
sion and Communion. According to Muriel Nazzari (1996:111) through the sacrament of
confession the Church sought to control the morality of the population. The faithful were
advised to confess frequently, but ecclesiastical law obliged them to confess at least once a
year during Lent. Curagaoan parish priests were ordered to prepare annual lists of mem-
bers of all households in their parish, and to record whether males over fourteen and
females over twelve years of age had confessed before Easter.
   As one informant stated:


Tempu aya tabatin un lugá spesial pa dera un             In those days there was a special place for peo-
hende ku muri sin ku el a konfesá risibi den             ple who did not go to confession and to com-
tempu di Kuaresma.                                       munion during Lent.
Pastor ta skibi tur hende su nomber ku a                 The priest would write down all the names of
kumpli ku Kuaresma. Si bo nomber no ta den               those who did comply with Lent. Ifyour name
buki, ta fièrnu bo ta bai.                               is not in the book, you will go to hell.
I nan ta derabo den chiké. Esei ta pida kurá             You would be buried in the chiké, that is in a sep-
parti pabou di santana.”                                 arate place at the western part of the cemetery.


The following Table indeed shows that more women participated in the Easter Commun-
ion and that more men remained outside the fold of Christianity.

   Table 6.2 Number of Males and Females Participating in the Easter Communion




   Source: Provinciaat Vicariaat der Paters (1945:3-4)




                                                                                                        7
One of the benefits of keeping to these rules was that one would be provided with a decent
Catholic burial. The ‘marka buraku’ (to mark one’s grave), as it was called, meant that one
assured having a consecrated burial ground ready for burial and that one would not be
buried in a place called the ‘chiké. Abiding by the rules of Lent was referred to in the same
way. An informant asserted that

Tempunan ayá pastor sa presis ken ta kumpli      In those days the priest knew for sure whether
ku kuaresma, pasó e ta skibi bo nòmber den       vou had kept the rules of Lent (kumpli ku
buki. Tur djadumingu bo mester a bai misa.       kuaresma), for he wrote down your name in his
Den kuaresma nos mester a lanta tres or di       book. Every Sunday you had to go to church. In
mardugá pa bai misa. Tabatin hopi hende 1 st     the period of Lent, we had to wake up at three
bo yega lat, bo no ta hana un lugá di sinta.     in the morning to go to church. There were a lot
Tempu ayá si bo kumpli ku kuaresma, pastor       ofpeople and ifyou were late you would not get
sa, pasobra e ta skibi bo nomber den buki.*      a place to sit. In those days ifyou complied with
                                                 Lent, the priest would know, because he would
                                                 write your name in a book.



Conclusion

The Roman Catholic Church was the prime institution exercising authority and control
over the lives of Afro-Curagaoans. In its civilizing mission the Church aimed to create a
Catholic mindset which required that in addition to people adhering solely to the Catholic
creed and liturgy and banning all other religious beliefs and practices, they should avoid
behaviour considered negative and rather focus on becoming hende drechi (decent peo-
ple). For every bon katóliko, the Church maintained a firm line in what it considered cor-
rect and moral behaviour.
    The different strategies it used in its civilizing mission covered many areas of social life.
It ranged from social assistance for the economically marginalized groups and the educa-
tion of young people to a more direct exercise of control through rules and sanctions,
including the exclusion of people from certain privileges, such as a proper baptism or
burial. It also included physical abuse of those who manifested obstinate disobedience.
    The Church succeeded in pervading the private lives of people in a way the State never
did, and in doing so influencing what Scott has called the hidden transcripts. The response
by Afro-Curagaoans to the influence of the Church has been paradoxical. On the one hand
they were attracted by the value system of the Church. Abiding by it opened up doors, but
at the same time it imposed values which were not always shared and clearly not always
obeyed. Some therefore tended to resist the control of the Church in various ways. On the
other hand, being a good Catholic meant a change of identity, which implied not only an
adherence to Catholic religious beliefs and practices, but a person tended to be moulded
in character and behaviour by the Church as well. For those who reached this condition, it
had social advantages, as they could be employed in institutions directed by the Catholic
Church, such as schools and hospitals, and in that way rise in social position as well. Like-
wise, children from couples who lived in monogamous relationships would also benefit.



72
In the following Chapters it will become clear to what extent Afro-Curagaoans adopted the
teachings of this influential body and how they accommodated or bent the concept of
‘bida drechi to suit their private lives.



Notes

    Kerkelijke Courant, no. 291, vol. 28, 26-7-1862.
    Idem. °
    Kerkelijke Courant, no. 291, vol. 28, 26-7-1862.
    Kerkelijke Courant, no. 368, vol. 30, 16-1-1864.
    Idem.
    Rozenkrans 1879:55.
    Kerstgeschenk 1883:166.
KF
WHY
SF
WM
CONDKerkelijke Courant, no. 368, vol. 30, 16-1-1864; Letter Kistemaker in Indisch Missietijdschrift 1963,
    vol. 46, p. 9-13. See also Amigoe, 1-7-1963 (integral publication of the letter).
     The anthropologist L.F. Triebels (1980) has discussed whether this custom is in fact African.
     However, for many years it was generally seen as a surviving African ritual and was also consi-
     dered as such by the Catholic clergy at the time.
     One kana di maishi is circa one litre of maize.
     Interview Geertruda Alberto (Ma Tuda) (born 1883), Allen, 13-3-1984 (NatAr).
     Interview Celestina Elizabeth (born 1897), Allen, 5-10-1981 (NatAr). She lived in the eastern
     part of the island.
     A drink made from the seed of the plant called ‘anis’, derived from the Latin word anisum.
     La Cruz, 11-2-1903. The title of the article is ‘Pobreza no ta berguenza’ (Poverty is not a shame).
     Kerstgeschenk 1883:186.
     Interview Thomas Plantina (date of birth not registered), Brenneker/Juliana, 10-2-1976 (T 52,
     Fundashon Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
   He was called ‘Pader di pafia pretu’ (the priest who wears a black rope) due to the fact that the
   members of his congregation wore a black rope (Latour 1940:3).
18 Vincent Jansen had a carpentry and blacksmith workshop. He built two large sailing ships and
   different types of boats for the fishermen of his parish. He also gave the men and women lines
   so that they could knit fishing nets. In that way he encouraged the people from his parish to take
   up fishing for a living. See Langenfeld 2001b:2.
19   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Ingekomen stukken 3e district, 1860-1905, 8-3-1864/73.
20   NA, Ministerie van Koloniën, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6741, 25-6-1866/405.
21   NA, Ministerie van Koloniën, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6741, 25-6-1866/405.
DD   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Geheime stukken, 1861-1880, inv. no. 3659, 17 -7-1866/1,
     19-7-1866/no number, 19-7-1866/55, 20-7-1866/18 and 17-10- 1866/2 (letter vicar apostolic I.B.
   Schermer).
ZS An analysis of the books of baptism of several churches reveals that at the time babies were bap-
     tized within six days following birth. This is also confirmed by oral history.
24 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 127, 23-9-
     1863/54.
25   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no. 127, 23-9-
     1863/ 54. See NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6749, 20-3-1880/102 (besides the
     home of the district master another building was indicated where marriages could be conduct-
     ed free of charge) and 27-3-1880/109 (the hour for marriage was left to the decision of the dis-
   trict master).
26 NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6741, 6-2-1 866/85.


                                                                                                     173
      NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Geheime stukken, 1861-1880, inv. no. 3659, 16-7-1866.
      NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6740, 11-4-1865/194.
      See NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6751, 16-8- 1883/437. The governor urges
      the civil servants and assistant civil servants of the Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages to
      register the names of children and their parents correctly. See also La Union, 23-1-1895: the
      priest devotes a whole article to the problem of misspelled names.
      Interview Aniceta (Yeta) Albertus (born 17-5-1902 in Willibrordus), Allen, 2-9-1984 (NatAr).
      NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Ingekomen stukken 2e en 3e district, 1906-1924, inv. no.
      102, 2-4-1909/141.
      Interview Seferina Valks (born 1903), Allen/Ernest Gaari, 8-9-1983 (NatAr).
      NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6784, 24-11-1886/718.
      Interview Carlota Victoria (born 28-4-1914), Allen, 7-5-2001, Private Collection.
      Interview Thomas Plantina (date of birth not registered), Brenneker/Juliana, 10-2-1976 (T 52,
      Fundashon Biblioteka Publiko Kòrsou).
      NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Ingekomen stukken 3e district, 1860-1905, 3-3-1864/73.
      See letter vicar apostolic H.J.A. van Ewijk, 6-7-1877, regarding the role of marriage in people's
      lives. According to him some people were reluctant to get married because they lacked the prop-
      er attire. NatAr, Lijst van ontvangen stukken, Pastorie Sint Anna, inv. no. 9 (Pastorale brieven),
   NatAr.
38 Henriques quoted in Joubert 1983:185.
3) Van Ewijk’s previously mentioned letter of 6-7-1877 was sent to the priests of the parishes to be
      included in the following Sunday’s sermon; it contained instructions for discussion topics for the
      entire year. NatAr, Lijst van ontvangen stukken, Pastorie Sint Anna, inv. no. 9 (Pastorale brieven)
   NatAr.
40 Interview V. Catharina Theodora (born September 1914), Brenneker/Juliana, 16-6-1983 (T 89,
   Fundashon Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
41 There were many beliefs regarding pregnancy and births. It was believed that during pregnancy
   a supernatural bond existed between mother and fetus. For example, the fetus of an emotional-
   ly unstable woman would feel and register a shock physically as a blemish or a deformity. The
   fetus may also be marked by its mother’s cravings for a particular kind of food. It was common-
   ly believed that a child may be affected in a similar way if the mother-to-be ate food considered
   taboo.
42 Brenneker 1970:1159-60.
43 Interview (no christian name registered). Simmons (born 1888), Allen, 15-1-1980 (NatAr).
44 The Sacred Congregation de Propaganda Fide, is the department of the pontifical administration
      charged with the spread of Catholicism and with the regulation of ecclesiastical affairs in non-
      Catholic countries.
45 Latour 1952:21.
46 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Gouverneur, civiel binnenlandse correspondentie, inv.
      no. 3652, (1-2) 24-2-1880.
47 Interview Severina Valks (born 1902 in Kenepa), Allen, 8-9-1983 (NatAr).
48 Van Ewijk, in his letter of 12-7-1877, instructed the parish priests to keep statistical records of
      their parishes, including the books of baptism, marriage and deaths. These specific records gave
      quantifiable information. NatAr..
49    Hamelberg 1895. See also Irus 1910:55.
50    La Cruz, 24-9-1902.
Si    Amigoe, 10-9-1904.
Sy    Brenneker 1970:1159-60.
53 The Roman Catholic mission, in this case the Fathers of the Dominican Order, published various
      weekly newspapers from 1870. In 1883 the Amigoe di Curacao was founded, initially in Papia-
      mentu and in Dutch, but after 1900, with the appearance of La Cruz in Papiamentu, it
                                                                                           contin-
      ued solely in Dutch. Broek 1990:61.


174
54    La Union, 21-8-1889.
35)   Idem.
56    La Union, 3-4-1890.
a7    Kerkelijke Courant, no. 368, vol. 30, 16-1-1864.
58    Interview Clemens Bonifacio (born 1908), Allen, 16-5-1989 (NatAr). Interview Anecita (Chita)
      Martina (born 21-4-1911), Brenneker/Juliana, 29-7-1982 (T 82, Fundashon Biblioteka Publiko
      Korsou).
59 The priest Poeisz was known for his literary abilities. He was admired by the folk class for his
      knowledge of Papiamentu and his talent to create songs in that language. He published a book
      of songs in Papiamentu.
60 La Cruz, 19-9-1919.
61 Kerkelijke Courant, no. 291, vol. 28, 26-7-1862.
62 NatAr, Archief bisdom, letter 16-7-1904/712. See also NatAr. Publicatie Blad 1884/16.
63 Amigoe, 30-5-1885. The author analysed the essay by dr. A. Bruinings in de Tijdspiegel of Febru-
   ary 1885 regarding the debate in the Netherlands on the introduction of non-religious schools.
64 O.S.T. 1891:296-7.
65 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Districtbeheer, ingekomen stukken 4e en 5e distict, inv.
   no. 92, 28-7-1917.
66 Interview Anecita (Chita) Martina (born 21-4-1911), Brenneker/Juliana, 29-7-1982 (T 82,
   Fundashon Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
67 Interview Anecita (Chita) Martina (born 21-4-1911), Brenneker/Juliana, 29-7-1982 (T 82,
   Fundashon Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
68 Due to their close relationship with the priest these women were referred to as children of the
   priest. This term could also refer to men.
69 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken, Correctionele Teregtzittingen 1871,
   Procesverbaal no. 32.
70 Interview Ana Schoop (born 1913), Allen, 1995 (NatAr).
AL NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken, Correctionele Teregtzittingen 1872,
      Procesverbaal no. 19.
72 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken, Correctionele Teregtzttingen 1892,
      Procesverbaal no. 14.
JS Brenneker 1970:1823.
74 Interview Maria Pieters (born 1880), Brenneker/Juliana,         1960 (Zikinza-collection, T 247,
   NatAr).
TS Kerstgeschenk 1883:186.
76 Latour 1952:71. Irus 1910:67.
Ted. Migration inspired people to make songs illustrating the intensity of the event. These purveyed
     important information about the way people experienced migration. Thus these songs are
     important information transmitters and most people of the older generations recall them more
   readily than any other information.
78 Interview Florita Reinila (date of birth not registered), Brenneker/Juliana, 1958 (Zikinzá-collec-
      tion, T 79, NatAr).
19 This proverb is generally used to indicate that someone is ungrateful.
80 La Cruz, 4-12-1901.
81 These were burial funds (sitter), established in the nineteenth century by the Roman Catholic
   Church. Members would pay a weekly contribution, which would be registered in a special exer-
   cise book (buki di sitter).
82 Latour (1952:24).
83 Interview Felipi Sambo (born 1906), Brenneker/Juliana, 1960 (T 30, Fundashon Biblioteka
   Públiko Kòrsou).
84 Interview Seferina Valks (born 1903), Allen, 8-9-1983 (NatAr).



                                                                                                  17/5
CHAPTER VII
Buska Bida: Making a Living




Post-emancipation Curacao was a heterogeneous society, comprising a variety of racial
and ethnic groups unequal in terms of wealth, status and power. In this society, economic
standing followed colour lines with power lying in the hands of a select group (Hoetink
 1987; Römer 1979). For the most part Afro-Curagaoans lacked power, both economically
and politically. The key question I will seek to answer in this and the following two Chap-
ters is: how did these factors affect the everyday lives of the freedpeople?
     Scholars have intensively studied the daily life of subjugated people. Holger Henke
(2004) stresses the necessity of uncovering the everyday life of people in the Caribbean, as
it holds the sources of Caribbean thought. For Henke, the difficulty in researching daily life
revolves around finding out what people find relevant in their lives and give significance
to. Should everyday life be studied as ‘a sequence of dull and ordinary acts and products’
or as the ‘extraordinary or bizarre’ in people’s lives? Either approach presents a challenge.
In the first, every type of activity can be considered part of daily life, thus leading to an
abundance of data. The second approach confronts us with the question of how to relate
the extraordinary and bizarre to recurring cultural activities and behaviour patterns
(2004:3). At an earlier stage the cultural philosopher Michael de Certeau also emphasized
the importance of studying day-to-day life in his book The Practice of Everyday Life (1980).
De Certeau states that daily life should not be conceived as ‘merely the obscure background
of social activity’ and therefore be concealed. Instead, it is necessary to ‘penetrate this
obscurity and to “articulate” it’ (1980:4).
    I will explore how, following emancipation, Afro-Curagaoans lived their daily lives and
how they went about this within the parameters of the two key institutions with power:
the State and the Roman Catholic Church. I will look at how, despite their subjugated sta-
tus, they were able to become important arbiters in managing their lives. The question I
will seek to answer is: in what ways did they try to give meaning to their daily existence in
a material, social and spiritual sense? Answering this question requires insight into the
actions taken by men and women in their attempt to take control of their lives within the
boundaries of the power system. In that sense I will address the interrelationship between
power and culture in an attempt to answer the much larger question of how culture
revealed itself in the everyday lives of Afro-Curagaoans.




                                                                                           177
Understanding Afro-Curagaoan Everyday Life
Using the concept of bida, here and in the following two Chapters, I will focus on the
dynamics of Afro-Curagaoans’ material, social and spiritual lives. Bida simply means life
and is used in connection with many different aspects of people’s daily lives. In trying to
comprehend post-emancipation everyday life of Afro-Curacaoans, certain issues need to
be considered. After 1863 the Roman Catholic Church and the State introduced several
mechanisms of social control. The Church in particular played an important role in
attempting to change the Afro-Curacaoans’ ways of life, with the goal of creating, through
Catholicism, a type of culture considered civilized and respectable.
    These processes of cultural influence emanating from the existing power relationship
between former slaves on the one hand and former masters, the Church and the State on
the other, made the lives of Afro-Curagaoans ever more complex. We then see a similar
phenomenon taking place as elsewhere in the Caribbean: the attempt of a small group of
Afro-Curacaoans, forming part of an emerging coloured middle class, to adapt as much as
possible to this culture of respectability. The greater part of this group lived in town, in
neighbourhoods such as Otrobanda and Punda, with some holding positions in commer-
ce. This group looked down on those lacking the same degree of culture and respectabili-
ty and would voice this in many ways.
    The land on which one lived was an important marker of social standing among Afro-
Curacaoans. Firstly, a division existed between town (Punda and Otrobanda) and the
kunuku: Banda Bou (western countryside) and Banda Riba (eastern countryside).' Those
living in town emphasized their cunning and bravery to distinguish themselves from those
in the countryside. The hende di Punda, as they called themselves, differed from the hende
di kunuku in the way that the former were believed to be cunning and brave while the lat-
ter were thought of as being docile, submissive and even stupid. In the interviews I con-
ducted, people would use the term ‘mucha di Punda, mi ta’ (I am a child of Punda) to
explain why they had behaved in a brave way or had been able to outwit those with power.
    People from the kunuku were also considered to be less respectable than those in town.
For example, they were labelled as talking too loudly and in an uncivilized manner. Their
Papiamentu was coarse (“Papia manera hende di kunuku’)” However, people from town
also thought fondly of the kunuku. And there was an underlying respect for the people
living there. It was, for example, commonly known that in the kunuku there continued the
practice of traditional cures and use of medicinal plants. For example Ma Yaya Felipa, born
around 1870, who lived in Barber (Banda Bou), was widely known for her capacity to cure
people; her reputation attracted many visitors from town.’
    Secondly, there was the division between the two parts of the kunuku: Banda Riba (in
the east) and Banda Bou (in the west). Already before emancipation, a large group had
been able to live as freedpeople in the kunuku, using the social opportunities available to
them. Many of them lived in Banda Riba, which was nearer to town. In contrast, most of
those freed in 1863 lived in Banda Bou. Hoetink (1958:84) writes that Afro-Curagaoans
classified themselves according to whether they were descendants of slaves freed before
or in 1863. During interviews, people often emphasized that they did not descend from
slaves. Some would pride themselves in their light complexion. An interviewee born in
1878 related with great satisfaction to Paul Brenneker: ‘Mi tata no tabata katibu. Nos aki


178
no ta sali di katibu, pero ela biba i kasa den tempu di katibu’ (My father was not a slave.
We are not descendants of slaves, but my father lived and married during the period of
slavery).*
    Most of the data in this and the following two Chapters come from oral sources, as they
have been the primary tool by which people expressed their day-to-day experiences. At the
time, Afro-Curacaoans formed an oral-based community, communicating their personal
and communal concerns principally in an oral form, especially through songs sung during
work and leisure, which were an outlet of communal and individual release, as well as a
vehicle for expressing joy, anger and protest. It was not until the beginning of the twentieth
century that a small group of Afro-Curacaoans began expressing themselves in prose,
mainly written in Papiamentu.



Daily Life and the Search for Land
In the Caribbean the limited availability of land has always been an issue. Engerman
affirms that land, besides the scarcity of labour, has been a key constraint on economic
opportunities in most Caribbean countries. He further argues that many scholars have
approached the subject of land supply in the region from an economic perspective. They
examined post-1863 land-labour ratios and land ownership in order to explain the varying
outcomes of emancipation in terms of changes in plantation output, non-plantation
opportunities open to former slaves, their standards of living, and even the success of poli-
tical control in influencing the distribution of incomes among members of these societies
(1992:58). Renkema’s study of plantation life on Curacao (1981a) has added a new dimen-
sion to the understanding of land use before and after emancipation as he addressed
questions regarding the provision of land on the island and also examined the restrictions
placed on blacks in attaining a piece of land.
     A close examination of the written documents reveals the enormous desire for land
among Afro-Curagaoans in the first years following emancipation. For Afro-Curagaoans
land was a symbol of one’s personal identity. People would be identified by the land on
which they lived.’ They would often refer to the piece of land where they were born as part
of their identity. Interviewees would for example say ‘Mi lombrishi ta derá na Dain’ (My
navel is buried in Dain (Daniel)), thus symbolically referring to the place in which one was
born and grew up.’ Others would say: ‘Mi ta hende di Sabaneta’ (I am a person of Savane-
ta), ‘Mi ta hende di Montafia’ (I am a person of Montafia) or ‘Mi ta mucha di Otrobanda’
 (I am a child of Otrobanda) etc — the last (‘mucha’) expressing an emotional relationship
with one’s place of birth.
     The desire among Afro-Curagaoans to own land was addressed in their oral tradition.
The following part of a Nanzi story, for example, reveals three themes: 1) land is an impor-
tant subject, 2) Nanzi acknowledges the power of the authorities — in this case of shon Arei
— in the distribution of land, and 3) he sees land as a solution to his empoverished posi-
tion:




                                                                                          179
      One day Nanzi and his wife had no food to feed themselves and their nine children.
      Nanzi knew all kinds of tricks and he decided to go to shon Arei (master king) to see
      how he could wheedle a piece of land out of him. He went to the king’s palace and said:
      Oh good master king, you are very powerful and generous. You alone can help me. lam
      as poor as a church mouse. I have to look after my wife and nine innocent creatures. if
      am running out of money. Shon Arei, for God’s sake, improve my lot, give me a piece
      of ground so that I may plant something (Baart 1983:101; Wood 1972:48).

As the story continues Nanzi again uses his notorious wits to acquire a piece of land. He
asks shon Arei for a piece as big as a cow’s hide, to which shon Arei agrees. Nanzi then buys
a cowskin and at home cuts it into thirty narrow strips. Following this, he, his wife Shi
Maria and daughter Pegasaja select a good piece of land. The next day Nanzi leaves home
with a long rope made of this cowskin to mark out the area. The king is surprised by the
size of the land but eventually concedes that once again Nanzi has managed to outwit him.”
     In reality it was not quite so easy to acquire a piece of land. Several factors constrained
the land available to free Afro-Curacaoans. For a long time the decision about whether a
person could attain a plot was in the hands of the former slave-masters, together with the
ruling class. As noted in Chapter V, those who continued living on the plantations in the
paga tera system remained dependent on the whims of the owners. However, the process
of leaving the plantation was hindered not only by limited economic opportunities and the
poor ecological environment, but also by several regulations and laws. Only those without
plantation work had a chance of renting a piece of land from the government.’ If one
already had work and a place to live on a plantation, permission would be refused.
     Those under this category would be considered ‘wanting to act on one’s own’ or ‘trying
to become too independent. This motivation for a refusal once again indicates that the
State and the plantation owners shared common values, determining their relationship
and interactions with the black population. Upon receiving a petition, the relevant district
master would inquire as to whether the plantation owners in the surrounding area had any
objections against handing out the requested land. Any objection would result in the peti-
tion being turned down. This regulation was applied both in the eastern and western dis-
tricts. This happened, for example, to Mathias Apostel, who in 1874 requested a piece of
government land south of plantation Sint Joris, where he worked and lived, for agricultural
purposes and to build a house. The district master turned down the request because he
considered Apostel’s wish to live on his own an indication of him wanting to detach him-
self from the plantation where he lived. The district master was also against the working
class acquiring large parcels of land close to plantations."
     Clementina Loop’s request in 1876 for a piece of government land on Montafia di Rei
to build a straw hut with kitchen and a corn storage for her and her children was also turn-
ed down on these grounds. The district master‘s argument was that the petitioner already
possessed a spacious home on the plantation of Jan Zoutvat, where she had been living for
a long time." This practice of control persisted in the western part of the island into the
twentieth century.
     Sometimes petitioners disagreeing with the refusal would openly show their discon-
tent. Such was the case in 1864, when a group of former enslaved and free people living on


180
plantation Engelenberg in Banda Bou petitioned for a piece of land. Their request to set-
tle on the government ground called Pannekoek was granted. However, this decision met
with a hostile reaction from the plantation owners, who feared an overcrowding in the
locality. When the district master wanted to withdraw his decision based on this objection,
the spokesperson of the group came forward and claimed ‘that they had submitted their
petition with due respect for the authorities, but if the granted permit were to be with-
drawn, they would move away, even leaving the country as they no longer had to comply
with the wishes of the plantation owners’. Subsequently, they were given the piece of land.”
In most cases, however, plantation owners succeeded in curbing the independence of for-
mer slaves, sometimes with the law on their side.
     Land issues seldom took the form of overt rebellion against plantation owners and
State autorities. Apart from stressing their lawful rights, Afro-Curacaoans underminded
those in authority in various ways on a daily basis. For example, in the report of 1864 by
the master of the third district to the Procurator of the King regarding harvest and animal
husbandry, he reported that part of the plantations’ harvest was lost due to workers
having been too busy working their own land, having refused to work for others, or hav-
ing worked very slowly.”
    While the plantation owners were against freedmen leaving the plantation, for the
black working class it meant ‘sali for di bou di pia di shon’ (coming out from under the feet
of the shon). Some acknowledged that they had become tired of always having to bow their
heads for the shons (‘Baha kabes pa shon’). Indeed, over time, an increasing number of
people wanted to be free of the shon and rent a piece of land from the government.
    The finance administrator for the colony of Curagao stated in a letter to all district
masters dated 29 May 1885 that the petitions by plantation labourers for renting or buying
land had increased." In an article written fourteen years later the same administrator
looked back and argued that in that way the black population wanted to free itself from
this state of dependence (de Veer 1899:329). Even into the twentieth century those who
had stayed on the plantations would continously use the threat to leave as a tool of resist-
ing the power of the owner. In 1909 a plantation owner complained that his black workers
were behaving in an independent manner and that he could not always get them to work.
He also pointed out that at the slightest reproach on his part, they threatened to leave his
plantation and rent a piece of government land instead.”
    As a result of increasing pressure by the working class, around 1885 more and more
land began to be distributed by the government. In order to avoid antagonizing the plan-
tation owners, the State initially handed out land well away from the piantations."® Later
on, however, the State would buy land from owners whose plantations had become eco-
nomically unviable. This was distributed to the freedmen, in order to create an independ-
ent peasantry.
    Much to the anger of the plantation owners, living on government land gave people a
sense of independence. In 1890 the owner of Savaneta (Savonet) complained in a letter
that the State had rented out 48 pieces of land near his plantation, in Westpunt. As a result,
he felt he could not let his animals graze on the land, or take material from there for burn-
ing his chalk-oven. He was also angered by the fact that people were keeping more animals
than allowed. His hostile feelings, however, also stemmed from being confronted with


                                                                                           181
                                                                                         liv-
people who disobeyed his orders. He felt that the people in Westpunt instigated those
ing on his plantation. As an example he cited    that  when  he had  refused  permissio n  to
dance the tambu on his land, they had danced in     the middle  of the public  road, arguing
that this was a free place for everyone.”
    Savaneta was one of the most enterprising plantations on the island. It had one of the
largest livestock and its average annual agricultural yield was the highest on the island,
providing work for many people (Renkema 1981a:248; Spanjers 1981:10). As a result it was
also one of the few plantations that did not see a transient workforce. As the following
Table shows, the population increased rather than decreased over the years.

       Table 7.1 Number of Inhabitants, Huts and Stone Houses on Plantation Savaneta, 1864-1899


        Year              Population    pe Huts and Stone Houses          |
        1864                  SS                      80 + 29
I       1868                  389                    143 + 34
        1876                  408                     80 + 34

        1884                  405                     No data

        1891                  396                    1725539

        1899                  452                    ekg sw

       Source: Renkema 1981a:155


However, it was also a plantation where people continually complained about the owners
in oral narratives. Studies by Brenneker and Juliana, Leon Weeber (2004, on this specific
plantation) and myself, contain several narratives with complaints about the autocratic
behaviour of the owners. In the following part of an interview collected by Brenneker and
Juliana the informant looks back on a childhood experience involving the owner. As a
small child he sometimes stayed with his grandparents, who lived on Savaneta. His parents
lived on free government land. When he compared this with life on the plantation he
emphasized the dominance of the land owner and the way the people responded to this.


Ami tabata un mucha nasé riba Westpunt. Mi        I am a child born in Westpunt. My mother is
mama ta di Sabaneta. Mi tata di Westpunt. Mi      from Savaneta. My father from Westpunt. My
tawela tabata fitó den hofi di Sabaneta. Mi _grandfather was an overseer in the orchard of
tabata e promé nietu, di un di su yunan. Un       Savaneta. I was the first grandchild. One day I
dia, mi a mira un mespel ku a kai for di palu.    saw a medlar (Mespilus germanica), that had
Ora mi ta bai kue pa bai kome e mespel mia _ fallen from the tree. When I went to eat it I saw
mira shon Harry. Nos tabata yam’é, shon — shon Harry. We used to call him shon Harry.
Harry. Ora el a mirami ku e mespel, e di ku mi: |When he saw me with the mespel, he asked me:
“Ta ki bo tin den bo man?’ Mi di kuné: “Ta un      ‘What do you have in your hand?’   Itold him: ‘It
mespel mi a hana bou di palu, shon. E di ku _ isa mespel which I found under the tree, sir. He
mu: “Tres’é p’ami. Ku su garoti, el a bula riba __ told me: ‘Bring it here to me. With his cane, he
mi, saka p'aya banda. Mia sali na kareda. Ora     jumped on me, and then sprang to the other



 182
mi a sali na kareda, el a bentami un palu. Mia    side. I started to run. When I started to run, he
hafia un piedra i mi a bent’é un piedra. Mi a     threw a piece of wood at me. I found a stone
bula waya, un kareda te Westpunt. Mi a bai        and I threw the stone at him. Then I jumped
laga mi tawela riba Sabaneta. Anto ora su         the fence, and ran straight to Westpunt. I left
manisé, mi tawela a puntra, si mi tabata riba     my grandfather on Savaneta. The next day, my
Westpunt. Mi mama di ku si. Anto el a manda       grandfather asked whether I was in Westpunt.
yamami, anto ora mi a bini. E di: Mi yu, ta       My mother told him yes. He sent for me, and
kiko a pasabo?’ Mi di, asina asina tata, pasó     when I came, he said: ‘My child, what hap-
asina mi tabata yama mi tawela, tata. ‘Bo no      pened to you?’ I told him: “Tata [father, because
por a bint bin bisami?’ Mi di: ‘No tata, paso e   I used to call him tata]. I said: Tata, so and so
homber tabata ku su garoti. M’a benta un          happened.’ ‘Why didn’t you come and tell me?’
piedra riba dje, tata. Wèl awor mi no ke pa e     I said: ‘No tata, because the man had his cane.
mirami.’ E di: ‘Mi yu, bo a benta e piedra?’ Mi   I threw a stone at him. Now I don’t want him
di kuné: ‘Si. E di: ‘Ai Dios. Pasó tur hende      to see me.’ He said: ‘My child, did you throw a
tabatin miedu di shon. Antes... paso si bo bisa   stone at him? I said: ‘Yes.’ He said: ‘Oh my
un kos di shon, ya tur hende ta hana doló di      God.’ Because everybody was afraid of the shon.
barika, mara sintura. Ta shon. Ami no tabatin     Formerly when people said something about
miedu paso mi tabata mucha. Rèspèt si. Nunka      the shon, everybody would get pain in their
niun hende a bisa mi wowo ta pretu, ma miedu      belly and would tie their waist. Because it is the
di shon mi no tabatin, paso m’a nase riba West-   shon. I was not afraid of the shon. I had respect,
punt. Mi ta di Westpunt. Mi mama di Sabane-       of course. No one could say that my eyes are
ta. Wel mi no tabatin miedu di shon. El a         black (that I don’t show respect to people), but I
manda bisa mi tawela, tresémipa e batimi. Mi      was not afraid of the shon, because I was born
tawela di kuné, no mi no ta biba den Sabaneta.    on Westpunt. I am from Westpunt. My mother
Mi tawela no por hibami pa e batimi."*            was from Savaneta. Well I was not afraid of the
                                                  shon. He told my grandfather to bring me so he
                                                  can beat me. My grandfather told him that I
                                                  did not live on Savaneta. My grandfather could
                                                  not take me to him so he could beat me.


This story demonstrates the perception of levels of freedom depending on where one lived.
The informant was born after emancipation. Even as a small child he was aware of the
different attitudes of those living on the plantation and those living on government land.
The latter had a sense of control of time, labour, one’s own life and that of the family. Over
time, plantation owners sensed this all-pervading notion of autonomy among the inhabi-
tants of government land. The owner of Savaneta complained in a letter about how peo-
ple from Westpunt used to sell him their dividivi beans for thirty cents, but now refused to
do so as they could sell them for four times this amount to another plantation owner.”
With their new-found freedom people made good use of the existing rivalries between
plantation owners.
    Geertruda Alberto, also called Ma Tuda, born in 1883 in the same community as the
previous informant, saw access to land outside the plantation as a means of achieving
more independence from the oppressive supervision previously experienced. It gave hera
greater degree of dignity and control of her own life and that of her family. She articulat-
ed this sense of control as follows:




                                                                                               183
Mi no a traha pa shon, ni mi kasá tampoko,        I did not work for the shon, neither did my hus-
pasó Westpunt no ta tera di shon. Westpunt ta     band, because Westpunt does not belong to a
tera di gobiérnu. Niun hende riba e pida tereno   plantation owner. Westpunt is government
ei no tin un shon. Tur hende ta liber!”           land. Nobody on that piece of land has an
                                                  owner. Everyone is free!


People felt that living on government land provided them with certain privileges. For
example, Martili® answered back to a plantation owner who had forbidden him to gather
wood from his land. Martili replied by saying that he had not taken wood from his plan-
tation, but rather from the nearby government land.”
     However, this perception of being free on government land was not entirely correct.
For example, the tenants were not allowed to sell liquor on these plots. This rule affected
women in particular, as they would often sell small quantities of rum (un mushi di rom) in
calabashes (gobi) to make a living. They were not allowed to organize a tambú gathering
on the land and were restricted to keeping only two donkeys and five goats to be tethered
at all times. In 1870 stricter laws were introduced regarding the number of animals allowed
and they had to carry an eartag. Sometimes animals would be shot if they strayed onto
plantation land.”
     According to Renkema, the increased acquisition of government land led to the emer-
gence of a peasantry farming small plots of land. This was particularly the case in the east-
ern countryside, where no elaborate paga tera system existed (1981a:156-7). In the west,
where this system prevailed, relatively small plots were owned. In some cases people living
on government land would make an agreement with neighbouring plantation owners
about a plot for subsistence farming. For example, some people in Westpunt had a plot on
Savaneta or on plantation Knip to practice agriculture; or people of the village of Willi-
brordus would have a piece of land on plantation Porto Mari. All of this fell under the paga
tera system.
    Related to this land issue was the common problem of obtaining water. Since most
wells were located on plantations, initially there were not enough wells on government
land. The previously mentioned Ma Tuda described how this affected her life when she was
a small child.

Mi mama ku mi tata ta hende di Sabaneta.          My father and mother are from plantation
Despues nos a roi tera, ei riba sabana bin biba   Savaneta. Afterwards we marked out a piece of
afó. Masha pena nos a pasa, traha trabou          land and came to live outside the plantation.
mashá duru. Na bo kabes bo tin di karga awa.      Life was hard. We had to work very hard. You
Serka di Sabaneta tabatin un pos. Su awa ta       had to carry water on your head. In the neigh-
dushi. Te’ nos a forma bibá, bai pidi pa koba     bourhood of Savaneta there was a well. There
un buraku pa saka awa. Pasó n° ta’tin pos, ni e   the water was sweet. It was there that we dug a
shon di Sabaneta no tabata duna awa na niun       well. Because [where we went to live] there were
hende ku no ta biba den su kunuku. Asina nos      no wells, and the owners of the plantation of
a biba, pasa trabou.”                             Savaneta did not give water to anyone who did
                                                  not live on their plantation. So we lived a troub-
                                                  led life.



184
Government land was usually given out for a finite period of time and allocated to a cer-
tain person. The rent was determined according to the land’s production potential, which
also served as a form of labour control. It meant that those not working hard enough
would be unable to pay the rent and were subsequently evicted. This was also applied in
the opposite scenario: those with more produce than the potential of their land could be
accused of theft. Thus it is not surprising that farmers were reluctant to give the district
masters the correct amount of produce harvested. A commissioner of the second district
mentioned this practice in an overview of the harvest of maize, beans and peanuts in his
district. He assessed the shortfall by comparing the weight of the maize to the size of the
cultivated field. He lamented that it was not possible to do the same for the beans, peanuts
and vine fruits.”
     People tried to circumvent this State interference by persisting in their requests to buy
a piece of land. As land owners, they would enjoy certain advantages and not fall under the
restrictive State measures. But most requests were refused. Those who managed to gain
ownership would often resell the land.”
     In the face of scarcity, land served as a primary symbol of personal identity, prestige,
security and freedom. Its significance could often be interpreted from names such as Bida
Largu (Long life), Comfortabel          (Comfortable), Deseo (Wish), Fe (Faith), Esperanza (Hope)
and Paciencia (Patience). Even the plots on plantations were given names. It is also through
land that historical knowledge about families and communities was transmitted from
generation to generation.
    The following survey carried out in 1906, recording land rented from the State, gives
an indication of land distribution by the government in the beginning of the twentieth
century. The second district had by far the highest number of rented plots. There, much
land had already been handed out to those freed before 1863. Following emancipation,
land would continue to be distributed, unhindered by the plantation owners, this being the
case in the fourth and fifth district until 1885 (Renkema                  1981a:157). In the second and
third district the parcels of land were small in comparison to those in the western fourth
and fifth districts.

   Table 7.2 Number of Plots Rented From the Government, 1906


                                  Second district | Third district | Fourth district | Fifth district

  Number of rented plots                 862

   Source: Extract uit het Verslag onderzoek in pacht uitgegeven landgronden op Curacao, Koloniale Verslagen 1906,
   bijlage O




Living on the Sabana
As was the case elsewhere in the Caribbean, freedpeople on Curacao who were unable to
rent or buy a plot of land would squat outside the plantations.” These pieces were called


                                                                                                              185
sabana and were used as grazing land for the cattle of plantation owners, who had re-
ceived this privilege by tradition from the Dutch West Indian Company. Following eman-
cipation, the owners would change this privilege into a right of ownership (Renkema
1981a:144-5). Among the squatters were Afro-Curagaoan men and women who had been
refused a piece of land on the grounds that their behaviour was not considered good. They
had, for example, been chased away from the plantations or from government land, or they
were people wanting a plot of their own and therefore simply squatted the land where the
planters grazed their animals.
    This trend was not new: prior to emancipation squatters had already been living on
these grazing lands. With emancipation approaching, a plantation owner urged the State
to sell him the land near his plantation in order to keep this group well away. He expected
much animal theft after emancipation. His request was granted.* With the increase of
squatters after 1863, tension hightened, with plantation owners categorizing the squatters
as thieves and lazy people. They were accused of allowing their animals to break the plan-
tation fences so that they could eat the maize; of stealing animals from the plantations; of
keeping more animals than allowed; of cutting wood to burn for charcoal; of selling liquor
and stolen goods; and of keeping the detested tambu dance on their land. Over time, these
complaints flared up and plantation owners directed letters to the government to. take
action. In 1867 for example, again two plantation owners urged the State to sell them the
land near their plantation in order to keep this group away.”
      The master of the second district, J. Ferguson, also focused on this attitude a few weeks
before freedom. He objected to the pattern of squatting and observed that more and more
freedpeople were building their houses at random near public roads. He felt compelled to
put forward the following advice to the colonial autorities:

      The several circumstances which I have observed since accepting my present position,
      have led me to take the liberty to come with several proposals regarding the admini-
      stration of the police in my district. The first issue regards the social life of the inhabi-
      tants and their way of settling down in this district. On both sides of the public roads,
      people are building houses on pieces of land. These houses are built with special per-
      mission from the government, under the strict condition that the inhabitants will not
      fence them and that they will not sell liquor there. But most of the time even with the
      greatest effort by the national police, these irregularities cannot be stopped or prevent-
      ed. In view of the forthcoming emancipation, when in this district about 1,200 people
      will become free citizens, it would be desirable to establish villages so that they can
      learn the basics of moral life.”

This urge to form orderly communities was also in the interest of the Church, as it would
afford the priests more control of parishioners. The Church possessed land in the western
countryside of Barber and Buitenbosch. It was also active in preventing people from being
dispersed. For example, when a certain family tried to gain ownership of a larger plot
which would displace other families living on the same land, the priest of the parish
protested against this on behalf of these families. The dispersion of relatives was something
to be avoided prior to emancipation.”


186
After 1863, the main institutions of society were confronted with the problem of how to
continue exercising social control on the lives of Afro-Curacaoans. A district master drew
attention to the urgency of this in view of what he believed to be lacking in their charac-
ter. He wrote that:

    They are slow and indifferent and rarely work with the aim of improving their situa-
    tion. Ifonly they can satisfy their immediate needs they are content. Most of the time,
    they would steal in order to satisfy their immediate needs. This is due to them living
    outside of any community on the savannas. This dispersion will only stimulate lazy
    behaviour and theft.

According to the district master an orderly community life should be stimulated as a form
of fostering civilized behaviour among the squatters. He argued that in this way:

    One could not eliminate laziness and theft with all force as long as these people lived
    outside of any community on the savanna. They would never become civilized as they
    cannot be controlled properly.”

His fear was that this cycle would be perpetuated as this behaviour of lawlessness would be
copied by their children. “Presently, he continued, ‘even their young children are contam-
inated by this behaviour, as their parents do not set a good example. He proposed a law
aimed at knocking down all illegally built houses on the savannas. The head of each fami-
ly would then receive a piece of land from the State where they could settle and form vil-
lages.
    Over time, squatting on the savannas became a thorn in the side of the district masters,
who would repeatedly complain about the uncontrollable agglomeration of huts.” The
principal argument of those with power was that blacks were not equipped for freedom
and that they needed some kind of external control. Encouraging them to live in a com-
munity, where the Church could play a central role and exercise better social control of
their lives was the favoured solution and was supported by plantation owners. In addition,
objections against these inhabitants originated from owners fearing that a group of inde-
pendent peasants would arise, resulting in a loss of workers on their plantations (Renke-
ma 1981a:144).
    As far as land was concerned, the sabana were by definition of very little agricultural
interest since they could barely support subsistence farming. At an earlier stage they had
been left by the plantation owners who had instead chosen the land with better opportu-
nities for cultivation. The inferiority of these plots is well expressed in the following song,
in which a woman scoffs at a man who has stolen a goatskin because he does not have a
farm or even a sabana.

Domati, bo w tin kunuku                          Domati, you dont have a farm
Domati, bo w tin sabana                          Domatí, you don’t have a grassland
Domati, ai ta nada bo no tin                     Domati, oh you don’t have anything at all
Domati, pone paki kuero abou                     Domatí, put that packet of goatskin down



                                                                                              187
In their everyday lives these hende di den sabana (people of the sabana) opposed to or fell
short of many existing rules and regulations in society. Popularly the name ‘hende di den
sabana’ became a synonym for a disorderly and uncivilized person. Yet some people who
lived on this land would pride themselves on this. They upheld the perception that they
were people who could defy those with authority. Those living in the sabana served as
models for the former slaves who had gained freedom under the worst conditions, being
left to fend for themselves.



Tera di Famia: Family Land
An important phenomenon surrounding land acquisition was that of family land. This has
been much studied by scholars of the Caribbean, such as Clarke (1957), Mintz (1974), Bes-
son (1992) and Thornburg (1990). Mintz (1974:155) characterizes the value attached to
family land as an expression of westernization and of resistance to imposed socio-economic
styles of life. Besson refers to this as a paradox in attitude by Afro-Caribbean peasantries.
Family land is both extremely scarce and at the same time an unlimited resource. Accor-
ding to Besson, the preservation of family land is a response to inequality. People reacted
to unequal relationships by creating and perpetuating the institution of family land
(1990:202).
    John Carter Thornburg defines family land as inalienable and undivided inherited land
by all blood relations of the original owner. According to him, based on its inalienable
nature, group-decision making structures, equal access and use by all heirs of the founding
ancestor, it could be seen as an adaptive strategy to overcome the disadvantages of socio-
economic conditions, such as land scarcity, determined by slavery and the plantation sys-
tem (1990:1, 94).
    Curagao too knew the phenomenon of family land. Family plots were either pieces
given to a slave by a benevolent master or had been bought by the people themselves. An
interesting case of family land in the western part of the country was a plot purchased by
a woman after she had bought the freedom of the man who she then married. After the
death of her husband on 13 May 1859 at the age of 78, the land was divided among their
ten children as family land. This became important family land in the west. As a result of
the sense of power this land afforded them, the owners would be in constant conflict with
the district master and surrounding plantation owners regarding the so-called transporta-
tion tickets: they carried more produce to sell in town than was legally allowed. They flout-
ed the rules and kept more animals than was permitted. However, they also had status and
were considered respectable by the other members of their community. The eldest mem-
ber of this family was constantly requested to sign the death register as a witness when
someone in the community had died, even though he could neither read nor write.**
    As elsewhere in the Caribbean family land was a plot shared with other co-owning
family members while the individual inherited only rights of access and use, not exclusive
possession. It did not recognize individual ownership. Family land entailed that the direct
descendants would hold an equal share in the property, whether or not they were residing
on the land. Some people did not live there, but still shared in the ownership. In these cases


188
they also referred to it as their piece of land (Henriquez 1969:85). The transfer of family
land was extra-legal, accomplished without a will and usually without title (Thornburg
 1992:94). It was mostly an oral agreement at the deathbed of the head of the family, where-
by the surviving kin had to uphold the wishes of the deceased, in accordance with the tra-
dition that one should always comply with the wishes of the dead.
     One of the first people to study the phenomenon of family land on Curacao was the
lawyer E.C. Henriquez (1969). In his profession Henriquez was confronted with the legal
obstacles people encountered when wanting to sell their plots of family land in the 1960s,
at a time when prices were increasing. In these cases all biological descendants would claim
to be entitled to the estate even though they had difficulty in proving that they descended
from the original owner (Henriquez 1969:85). Being the direct descendants of enslaved
people, they sometimes had problems in making a legal claim to the land, since slaves were
not legally allowed to own land. This would also constitute a problem if in the past the
ancestor had failed to recognize his children or in case the children were born out of wed-
lock. Under Dutch Civil Code, the mother also had to recognize her children so that they
could claim lineage from her. As this seldom happened, many of these children could not
prove their legal descent.
     Thornburg (1990:94) comments that when looking at family land from a legal point of
view, it is indeed thought to create conditions of uncertainty and insecurity with regards
to owning and farming. However, family land held symbolic value for the people who
claimed ownership and was central in identity construction. Its symbolic value for its own-
ers is expressed in the following statement by Eduardo Tokaai, whose family land was in
Banda Bou.

Mi tata ta di Soto. Mi mama ta di Soto. Mi        My father is from Soto. My grandmother is from
mama ta hende di Seru Saré. Nos akinan ta         Soto. My mother is from Seru Saré. We here, are
hende di Seru Saré. Bo sa Seru Saré banda di      Seru Saré people. You know, Seru Saré, close to
misa di Barber. Seru Saré no ta tera di gobièr-   the church of Barber. Seru Saré is not govern-
nu, ta tera di famia. Nos no ta bende niun        ment land. It is family land. We do not sell any
hende ku no ta famia niun pida tera.”             piece of land to anybody who does not belong to
                                                  our family.




Agriculture: Life’s Sustenance
Arable farming was one way for Afro-Curagaoans to make a living. The term kome di tera
(to eat from the land), indicates a bond with the land as a food-providing entity. After
emancipation, millet continued to be the primary crop. Clearing, planting, weeding and
harvesting the millet were important aspects of farming and determined people's daily
lives.
     Cultivating arable land began after the rainy season in September. Labour was prima-
rily sourced from members of the household. If additional labour was required workers
could be brought in, being paid in cash or a reciprocal arrangement was made.” In the
ideal situation, with a male present, he presided over the course of agricultural work.


                                                                                              189
Women and children would participate in all phases. The division of labour during plant-
ing was as follows: a man walked along a line and at each step dug a hole with his hoe, while
the woman and children followed and dropped millet and pumpkin seeds as well as beans
into the holes. The number and composition of the household determined how much land
could be cultivated.
    The following statement gives an example of how working the land controlled the day’s
schedule and shows the role all household members played in this:


Mi tata tabata bai drumi den mondi” grandi,       My father used to go to sleep in the bushes,
ora nan tabata rosa pida tera pa planta. Ora e    when the land had to be cleared for planting.
ta bai traha kunuku,    e ta bai drumt einan.     When he would work the land, he would go and
Mainta ku promé kanto di para, nos ta lanta.      sleep there. In the morning with the first birds,
Tempu ku papa ta’a tini kunuku, nos tabata        we would wake up. When my father worked the
yuda papa planta, yena buraku. Tata ta koba       land, we would help him with planting by
buraku i nos ta buta un sinku pipita di maishi,   throwing seeds into the holes. Father would dig
un di patia, un di pampuna (Cucurbita maxt-       the holes and we would drep in them about five
ma), 1 dos bonchi aden.”                          seeds of maize, one seed of the watermelon and
                                                  one of the pumpkin (Cucurbita maxima) and
                                                  two beans.



The process of planting was called traha kunuku (to work the land). Traha, in this context
‘to work, indicates the amount of effort undertaken in clearing the land for planting.
“Traha kunukw had a stronger meaning than ‘tene kunuku’ a term referring to the posses-
sion of a piece of land.
    It is clear that agricultural work was not restricted to males. In households without a
male head of the family, women would usually perform tasks typically performed by males
and clear the land themselves.” This was also the case, for example, if the male was work-
ing abroad or in town. If funds were available a man might be hired to dig the holes.
Maria Martina married Antersijn, born in 1910, recalled that when she was a little girl her
mother used to pay a man sixty cents per day to work her land after her husband had left
to work in Aruba. In this case, her mother sold the crop surplus. The hired worker had to
be someone with a good knowledge of planting, to ensure a successful crop which could
be sold in town.”
    With respect to tools, most farmers only owned a hoe. This was a simple tool identical
in design to the one their forefathers had used during slavery and in Africa. Instruments
like plows were rare, even on the plantations, except for Savaneta. With the hoe, the work-
ers broke and aerated the soil (drecha tera), dug holes one foot apart — they gauged the dis-
tance using their own foot — into which they dropped different types of seed. Into one hole
the millet and pumpkin seeds were dropped together with beans. This multi-cropping
technique served as a type of soil management but was criticized by agriculturalists
brought in from the Netherlands in the beginning of the twentieth century. They consi-
dered this method of planting chaotic and unbeneficial and added that even white planters
had adopted this method. This shows that cultural contact between those dominating and
those subjugated was not always one-way and top-down. The agriculturalists gave


190
recommendations on improving planting methods.” However, as they described other
aspects of life of the lower class in a negative sense, they were critized by the Roman
Catholic clergy.”
    Some elderly Afro-Curacaoans stated in conversations that by planting in this manner,
the most fertile land — where the earth was cold (tera frieu) — could be best utilized. While
the millet would grow tall, the bean twines would wrap themselves around the stalks and
the pumpkins or melon plants would trail across the ground. Other crops planted were
peanuts and sometimes sweet potatoes. One could plant peanuts in November and harvest
the fruits within three months. Peanuts were an important ingredient for the mangusa, a
meal also consisting of beans and millet. In the beginning of the twentieth century peanuts
were sold for twenty cents a liter and they were eaten boiled or roasted as a snack. They
were also an important ingredient for sweet cakes, a delicacy sold in small shops (Ben-
jamins en Snelleman 1914-1917:26).
    Millet was a challenging crop to grow. The farmer was faced with different problems,
requiring a great deal of time and energy. Marijke Steegstra in her book Resilient Rituals
(2004) on the function of millet in rituals, quotes the Ghanian scholar C.K. Ayi (1966),
who remarks that ‘although millet is superior dietetically to maize, it is a more uncertain
crop for it is difficult to protect from birds and shows small returns for more bulk and
labour’ (2004:176). This was also the case for Curacao. Great care was necessary for the
plants to survive until harvest time. While growing, the millet had to be hoed and pro-
tected from insects, pests, weeds and, towards the end, birds, which could damage an entire
crop. In March or April the millet would be harvested.
     The seasonal rhythm of a farmer’s life was determined by the succession of tasks regard-
ing the cultivation of millet. The division of time was based on the following farming calen-
dar:

   Table 7.3 Calendar Organized Around Cultivating Millet


 Month            Activities
                  Dry season (drecha kunuku). Clearing and breaking the piece of land of
                  the kunuku with a hoe.
 July             Dry season (drecha kunuku). Clearing and breaking the piece of land of
                  the kunuku with a hoe.
 August           August rains. Most planters would not begin to plant with this rain, as it would
                  not always last, resulting in the new plants being scorched by the sun.
 September        September rain, the true rain for planting.
                  Planting millet, climbing-beans, pumpkins, peanuts.
                  Weeding and taking care of the kunuku.
 December         The millet grows. The struggle against insects, worms, mosquitoes and
                  Ustilago.”
                 Ensuring that the millet stalks do not drop. Chasing away the birds.
                 Ensuring that the millet stalks do not drop. Chasing away the birds.
                 Harvesting the millet and storing it.



                                                                                                 191
 April                 Harvesting the millet and storing it.                                               |

 May                   The remaining millet stalks with leaves are left to dry in the field, after which
                       they are cut, stacked and saved (or sold) as food for animals.


      Source: Benjamins, 1914-1917:457 and oral interviews


Farmers were at the mercy of nature and constantly faced the fact that natural circum-
stances were not always favourable for arable farming. Even those who criticized Afro-
Curacaoans for being lazy, had to admit that when the natural conditions were favourable,
the desire for planting was sufficiently powerful to dispel this notion. One of the people
interviewed by the aforementioned Commission preparing for emancipation stated: “The
freed black people are a real cancer on the colony. Those who hire them cannot rely on
them. When they are most needed, for instance when it starts raining, which is the best
moment for field labour, they throw away their hoe to go and cultivate their own land’
(Staatscommissie 1856:229).
     In 1911 this attitude was again the focus of attention. A district master stressed in a let-
ter to the governor that this behaviour occurred mostly during the rainy period. In 1914
another district master complained that during a rainy year there was a lack of labourers
on the plantations as they were working their own land.“ There seems to have been conti-
nuous tension between working the plantation owner’s or your own land first. This attitu-
de was rationalized and affirmed in the following proverb: ‘Plantadó di: promé awa ta awa’
(The planter says: the first rain is the best rain). Also the expression “Tera ta ranka’ (The
land is pulling) reveals a traditional view on land and is used to describe the urge for plant-
ing crops when natural circumstances are favourable.
     In a year with sufficient rain people were sometimes able to harvest enough food for
humans and animals for the next couple of years. However, drought was a recurring pheno-
menon, resulting in no harvest at all.” After a year of drought, people would often request
the district masters to postpone their land rent, which was sometimes granted. The afore-
mentioned government survey of 1906 on land rented from the State also gives an insight
into the way tenants payed their rent. It reveals that in the second district the number of
tenants not paying rent was high (about 17.5 per cent), followed by 13.4 per cent in the third
district, 8.9 per cent in the fifth and lowest in the fourth district, where 2.6 per cent failed to
pay. As noted before, the second district comprised the largest number of plots distributed
by the government before and after emancipation. However, this was usually virgin land and
required much more work before crops could be planted (Koloniaal Verslag 1907:23).
     According to the agriculturist Fiedrich Went, people complained that the half hectare of
land usually issued by the government yielded an insignificant harvest. Plots had to be at
least eight hectares in order to yield a harvest that would provide a comfortable living. Due
to this, and the fact that the second district was situated near town, in most cases the men
would take additional jobs in town in order to supplement their income (Went 1902:48).
     Renkema has revealed the correlation between drought and migration. He noted that
the number of people emigrating in search of work would increase dramatically after a
drought year. They would move to countries such as Venezuela, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Santo Domingo and Suriname.”


192
The shortage of water was also a matter of concern for the colonial government. At the
beginning of the twentieth century several measures were introduced to address this pro-
blem. One such measure was the building of subsidized dams (Duyfjes 1914:226), which
began in 1905. These dams formed reservoirs to retain water for the dry season. Some
planters down river of the dams complained that in doing so the government had severe-
ly reduced the water flowing into their land.”
    Another course of action was the introduction of different varieties of millet, with a
shorter growing time and requiring less labour and rain, such as the maishi di shete siman
(seven-week millet) and the maishi rabu (millet with a tail), which was mostly planted in
Aruba.” As part of governmental policy experimental fields of maize were planted, with
some of these varieties receiving popular names such as Kabes Largu (Long head), Santa
Marta, Pichi Be (Pietje Beker), Carabagno, Maishi Rabu and Broomcorn (KV 1910:28).
    In a drought-prone island such as Curagao, successfully harvesting the millet demon-
strated that one had been able to transcend all natural challenges. The harvest was cele-
brated with much festive joy. It was a celebration of work, showing that all the hard work
had paid off. This coincides with the proverb ‘Na mangasina di vruminga nunka no ta falta
kuminda (In the warehouse where the ant stores its millet, there is no lack of food). It was
also a community celebration. Harvesting work was reciprocal. Extended family members
and neighbours would come and lend each other a hand (duna un man). There was a kind
of reciprocal labour rotation which assured people that when the time came for harvest-
ing their own land, there would be others willing to help, based on the idea of ‘Awe ta
p ami, manan ta p’abo’ (Today is for me, tomorrow is for you).
    Harvesting the millet took place in three phases. During the first phase, in the morn-
ing, the millet was cut. At sunrise men and women would gather in the kunuku. The men
would cut the millet while the women would collect the crop and put it in a container or
basket (dakwe). Music was a very important part of this process and the workers would
sing songs to energize themselves. During this first phase the cow horn was blown rhyth-
mically to call the labourers to work and set the pace of their collective efforts. This is sim-
ilar to what Roger Abrahams describes as the ceremony of corn shucking in the United
States (1992:84-5). On Curacao the group cutting the millet synchronized their move-
ments, thus creating regular sounds which were incorporated into the music. The
impromptu lyrics varied from those with a religious content — thanking God for the har-
vest — to those with more secular themes, describing different aspects of life.
    The second phase of the harvest celebration revolved around storing the millet. Now
the workers would proceed to the storage place, the mangasina, to the rhythm of the drum,
cow horn and the piece of plough called the agan. Apart from instruments and songs, this
phase was also accompanied by performances. In one of the acts two men dressed as rival-
ing bulls — one representing an old bull, the other a younger one — would fight each other,
ending with one being symbolically killed.” Sometimes there were also stick-fights. These
performances, based on the agility of males in particular, also represented the vieing for
power and authority between the young and the old males. Here emphasis was placed on
male dominance. Rogers notes that this tradition of topical play is evident throughout the
United States and the Caribbean (1994:110).




                                                                                             193
In the third and final phase the work was finished and people gathered at the home of the
organizers to dance and sing to the rhythm of the drum. Now the ceremony reached its cli-
max. This was called Seti será. The music and the songs resembled those of the tambu. This
heated component of the seú celebration met with much criticism by those with power.
Because of its association with the tambu, priests would advise against this part of the har-
vest celebration.” Most probably due to these objections, in the beginning of the twentieth
century an unsuccessful attempt was made to criminalize this celebration, when one of the
district masters sent a letter to the priest in the eastern part of the island stating that those
engaged in the celebration, as well as the owner of the land, should be prosecuted by law.”
    As stated, a good millet harvest meant food for a few years. Very often rural people
would relate that when food was scarce, it affected people in town earlier, as those in the
kunuku could fall back on the stored millet. Thus millet came to symbolize abundance.
However, in case of a long-standing drought even those in the countryside would suffer
food shortages and start eating the seeds reserved for planting. Whenever there was a har-
vest surplus, this would be used along with other commodities as barter for material goods
or services. This could for instance serve as payment for the services of a midwive or for
the person who laid out the dead.
    Agricultural work was combined with other forms of work. Often people would follow
many different occupations in a lifetime. Written documents reveal that people would
report a certain type of work in one year and another in the next. When comparing the
land contracts in the fourth and fifth districts at the end of the nineteenth century with the
death certificates of the same people, they appeared to have been registered differently with
regard to their professions. The Colonial Report of 1903 also indicates that it is difficult to
determine the professions of people. Someone would mention one day that he was a
farmer, but the next day put forward another type of employment, depending on the work
available at the time.
     From the aforementioned survey of 1906 I have attempted to gain an insight into the
number of people stating that they made their living as farmers (see Table 7.4). This reveals
that the highest precentage of those dedicating themselves to agriculture was 79 per cent
(in the eastern part of the island). The lowest is 57 per cent, in the district nearer to town.
Apparently those living near Willemstad relied more on urban labour — whether this
reflected their preference for urban over rural labour or rather the lack of rural opportu-
nities is a question still difficult to answer.




194
    Table 7.4 Cultivation of Government Land, 1906



                                     |                ii              Im
                                           Second           Third          Fourth          Fifth         Total
                                           district        district        district   |   district       land

ota number of tenants                        862      |      299             75              90           1326
                          gm
  Total land planted with millet             681             172             50       |      64
                                                                                                     7 976
  Total uncultivated land                    181             137             25)             26           Bal

  Land uncultivated compared
                                                      zl              4
  to total number of tenants               21.00%          45.82%          33.33%         31.11%        27.98%

  The amount of land planted
  with millet compared to total
  number of tenants                        79.00%          57.53%          78.67%         71.11%        73.60%


    Source: Extract uit het Verslag onderzoek in pacht uitgegeven landgronden op Curacao, Koloniale Verslagen 1906,
    bijlage O.




Fishing as an Alternative
 An alternative to working the land in order to make an independent living was the fishing
 trade, also practiced by Afro-Curagaoans during slavery. However, in his report of 1868,
 van Dissel concluded that fishing was regarded as being of little importance to the inhab-
 itants of Curagao. Men fished simply in small dug-out canoes in the harbour or in the bays,
 catching very little. He considered fishermen low on the social ladder. Due to their hard
work, they were old and sick before their time. Unless they had family to support them,
they often became a burden to the government (van Dissel 1868:433-4).
     Early in the twentieth century Jan Boeke, assistant biologist at the Dutch national insti-
tute for maritime research, on the instigation of the colonial government made an
overview of the fishing culture and a study of the possibilities of setting up a fishing indus-
try in the West-Indies, also in Curacao (1907-1919) Boeke’s findings shed light on the
fishing methods at the time and the names given locally to the fish, which he then com-
pared to those in the region. He concluded that fishing was an underdeveloped economic
sector. Boeke’s study was continued by Dr. PJ. van Breemen in 1909, who also gave rec-
ommendations on developing a local fishing industry.”
     From these reports it is clear that a group of people — again their number would fluc-
tuate annually — would earn money from fishing. This was, however, not easy due to the
hardships faced as a result of their primitive dug-out canoes and techniques. Especially
those fishing in the waterways belonging to plantation owners had a hard time complying
with often arbitrary rules. Written documents and interviews show that among older fish-
ermen there was a continuous power struggle with plantation owners for access to the sea


                                                                                                                 15
from their grounds. There were other problems as well. For example, the owners of the
plantations of San Nicolas, Klein and Groot Sint Marta, asked the district master to be vig-
ilant in the waterways as they accused the fishermen of stealing their salt ready to be
shipped and of opening the estuary of their salt-pans without asking their permission, in
order to place their nets.”
    Fishermen coming from the fishing communities of the island avoided these problems
by remaining in the waterways near their villages. There were very few such villages, all
having been established before emancipation and consisting mostly of freedpeople, who
had adopted fishing as their major occupation. In the main these villages were situated in
the western part of the island, the most important ones being Westpunt and Boca Sami.”
The latter, inhabited by the offspring of a Dutch soldier and freedwomen, was for long
characterized by its close-knit family relationships, its own form of Papiamentu and a
sense of community excluding others not belonging to the in-group of the community.
    The aforementioned researchers stated that fishing relied on traditional methods. Most
of the equipment, such as the canoes and nets, were made by the men themselves. One
method involved casting a net onto a school of fish from the shore or in shallow waters. In
this case evening fishing was preferable, as then one could see a school of fish as it glittered
in the water. The other method entailed standing on a rock with a fishing rod. This was
mostly done on the northern side of the island, where there were plenty of fish in a rela-
tively calm sea. These techniques were mostly an individual undertaking.
    Another method was net fishing at sea, usually involving more than one person —
sometimes several family members — with a more diversified labour division. People would
fish from boats, with a captain and two or three crew on board. As the men would bring
their fish to shore, they would sing kantika di bua kanao (songs to beach the boat);
bystanders would also lend a hand, a phenomenon familiar in the Caribbean (Price
1966:1374). The captain was the owner of the boat and of the fishing nets and was there-
fore called the dofio di reda. There was thus a hierarchy among these fishermen. The dofio
di reda would receive the largest share of the catch, while those without their own floating
nets” would get a smaller share (van Dissel 1868:443-4). In conversation with elderly peo-
ple, they stated that in this way a group of middle class families emerged through fishery.
They were able to give their children a good education.”
     Fishermen were aware of the insecure basis of this way of living, as also indicated by
the proverb ‘Tur dia ta dia di piska, pero no ta tur dia ta dia di kohe’ (It is everyday fishing
day, but not catching day). Besides the uncertainties of whether or not one would be able
to catch any fish, the seas were dangerous. Fishing boats could be dragged by currents out
to sea and as most fishermen could not swim, falling overboard could be fatal. The many
risks fishermen were faced with on the water were recounted in their stories, such as this
one:


Un piskadó mester tin mashá tinu, tin tantu        A fisherman must be very alert, as much can
kos ku ta pasa riba laman. Un piskadó ta muri      happen at sea. A fisherman can die because of
pa su bobo. E ta muri na laman pa su bobo. Ku__    his stupidity. He can die at sea for his stupidity.
e boto bira bok’abou…, ku e kos ei bira bok’abou   If the boat turns over..., or fills up with water,
of yena ku awa, bo no por bai lag’é. Ku bo bai     you must not leave it. Ifyou leave the boat, you


196
 laga e boto ei, bo ta muri. Na e tantu mia [for      are dead. Because from where the boat has
 di kosta] kaminda e boto a bira [béltu], pa bo       turned over, you cannot swim to the shore. You
 landa foi djaya bin kue tera, bo no por. Bo ta       will die. That is why when the boat turns over
 muri. Ta p'esei ora e boto bira bok’abou, bo ta      you have to hold onto the boat. Maybe another
 tene ne boto. Por pasa un bapor, ken ku pasa bo      boat can pass by, whoever passes by can help
 ta hafia un yudansa, bo ta skapa. Bo mester          you, and you will be saved. You have to hold
 tene n’e boto, pasó e boto ei t’e ta bo bida. Pasó   onto the boat, because it is the boat which is
 laman n° ta pordoná. Laman n’ ta pordoná.”           your life. For the sea does not forgive. The sea
                                                      does not forgive.

The insecurities surrounding the actual fishing also applied to the sale of the fish. This was
mostly done by women. Women had the task of going around selling the fish in baskets
while shouting piska fresku (fresh fish). Sometimes they would first fry the fish and then
walk the long distance to town to sell them. This was an uncertain business, as people did
not always have money to buy fish. Or sometimes they would buy on tick but never pay.”
Fishermen often fell back on other professions in order to escape this insecurity. They
would become sailors, work in town as dockmen or emigrate, depending on the labour
opportunities available at the time (Boeke 1907:64).



 Work Opportunities in Town
As previously mentioned, there was a growing tendency to not depend solely on a subsis-
tence income but to participate in the wage economy, either on the plantations or in town,
where labour opportunities were broader and one could earn more than in the countrys-
ide. The urge to go to town and search for employment (“Bai Punda pa buska un bida’) was
strong in both men and women. Following emancipation, this type of rural-urban migra-
tion became a common phenomenon. In April 1864 one of the district masters in the wes-
tern part of the island reported that he had learnt by word of mouth from several planters
in his district that the recently freed were leaving the plantations to settle outside their dis-
trict or go to town.” As a result, planters did their utmost to prevent people from leaving.
Those living under the paga tera system were hindered in looking for work elsewhere. But
in the long term, the wages of thirty cents and a litre of maize per day were insufficient to
pay for food, clothing and other necessities. If one wanted to go and work in town, a spe-
cial permit from the plantation owner was required, as is shown in the following case:

 Tempu mi tabata chikitu mi tabata serka mi           When I was a little boy I was staying at my
 tawela. Mi tionan ta traha den kunuku di             grandfather’s. My uncles worked the land at
Sabaneta. Nan ta bini Punda bin buska trabou.         Savaneta. They would go to town (to Punda) to
Promé ku nan sali Sabaneta, shon ta eksigi ku         look for work. Before they left Savaneta, the
nan ta tuma un papel, anto ta hiba e papel            land owner required that they took with them a
serka shon Wilmu na Punda. Anto nan no por            paper to give it to shon Wilmu in town. And
keda mas ku dos siman. Asina yega dos siman           they were not allowed to stay for more than two
nan tin ku bai bèk. Nan tin ku tuma un papel          weeks. After these two weeks they had to go
serka shon Wilmu pa hib’é Sabaneta. Si nan            back. They had to get a paper from shon Wilmu
yega Sabaneta i nan no tin e papel et, nan no         and take that to Savaneta. If they arrived at


                                                                                                  197
por drenta. Mi tabatin un tio ku yama Jan. E       Savaneta without that paper, they were denied
tempu ei mi tabatin seis afia. A sosodé ku el a    access. I had an uncle called John. At the time I
bini Punda, bin traha na Punda. Dia ku e taba-     was six years old. It so happened, that he went
ta bai bèk el a bai sin tuma papel. Tabata         to town to work there. The day he was going
tempu di shon Jaco, no tabata tempu di Harry.      back he forgot to take the paper with him. At
Shon Jaco, e tata, a puntra mi tio pa papel. Tio   that time we had shon Jaco, not Harry. Shon
di ku el a lubidá di tuma papel. Shon Jaco di ku   Jaco, the father, asked my uncle for the paper.
e no por drenta. E di: Si mi no por drenta mi ta   Uncle said that heforgot to get the paper. Shon
bolbe bai Punda. El a bin traha na Punda.          Jaco said that he was not allowed access. Then
Despues el a bai Venezuela. El a keda Venezuela    my uncle said: ifIcannot get in, I will go back
ayá, hopi tempu.”                                  to town. He went to work in town, in Punda.
                                                   Afterwards he went to Venezuela. He stayed
                                                   there for a long time.


Some people from Banda Riba worked in town during the day and used their land solely
as a place to live (Koloniaal Verslag 1907:23). Naturally, town provided different opportu-
nities from the countryside. Men, for example, repaired boats, transported people in ferry-
boats, loaded and unloaded ships (Irus 1910:57).
     Both Otrobanda and Punda fostered the development of an artisan class with small
businesses as blacksmiths, shoemakers, carpenters and tailors. In town young boys were
able to learn a trade by becoming apprentices to craftsmen. Fine carpentry by skilled local
carpenters was sought after at the time.” The furniture was sold both on the local market
and abroad. Locally they were made for members of the higher class, although the lower
class would also acquire furniture — albeit of lesser quality — when getting married (Nije-
Statius van Eps 1995).
     In the late nineteenth century, as steamships began to replace sailing vessels, Curacao
became an important coal refuelling station for coal-powered ships. Due to the protected and
safe harbour, commerce and seafaring became increasingly important. Men would carry bas-
kets of coal on their shoulders; for each basket they were given a locha (token) which would
later be exchanged for money. Every year around a thousand ships, carrying provisions from
the Netherlands, would use the island’s harbour. The following description comes from Didi
Sluis, who in the beginning of the twentieth century worked in the harbour:

E trabou di Klep ta un trabou di bestia e ta’ta.   Harbour work is like animal work. Very hard
Un trabou duru. Tin biaha, mi ta saka 200, tin     work. Sometimes I would fill 200, 250 baskets a
biaha 250 makutu pa dia. Bo tin ku yena 100        day. One had to fill 100 baskets to get 1 guilder.
makutu pa 1 florin. Subi trapi, yena krenwa,       You had to climb the stairs, fill the wheelbarrow,
pusha krenwa, basha karbon. Bo pia ta kumin-       push the wheelbarrow, and throw out the coal.
sd slep. Bo n por bai mas. E krenwa ta bira di     You will feel like losing your footing. You will get
banda, pero bo n° por basha karbon. Si bo          tired. The wheelbarrow turns over, but you can-
basha, kla ba keda. Bai kas bai kas. Ta kla bo     not lose any charcoal. If that happens, you are
ta. Ta yen di mucha ta sintá ta warda.             lost. They will tell you to go home. There are
                                                   many boys, just sitting and waiting for a job.

This also shows that work in town was not always as favourable as people moving from the
country had imagined. The Roman Catholic Church did not stimulate the migration to


198
town using the problems one was likely to encounter there as a deterrent.” People from the
kunuku were also aware of the negative aspects of working in town. The lack of accom-
modation was a great problem, but also for example the presence of uncontrolled prosti-
tution and the related venereal diseases, ironically called malu di muhé (sickness of
women).
    When comparing life in town to the kunuku an informant stated ‘Parti di kunuku taba-
tin mas réspet ku parti di Punda’ (In the kunuku people had more respect than in town).”
Respectful in this sense implies being subservient. The change of character some people
would undergo in town was both admired and disdained. An informant from the kunuku
remembered how her brother, who had been working and living in town, would bend a
tambu gathering to his will and start singing improvised songs upon his return home at
the end of each year. She recalled that the text of the particular song portrayed a self-image
of someone defying any form of interference and oppression. This was also the image
people in town and emigrants liked to portray of themselves, to emphasize a behaviour
distinguishing them from those in the kunuku.

Mi mama ta lisinbein                               My mother is a centipede
anto mi tata skorpion                              and my father a scorpion
anto mi mes ta arana di pinda                      and I myselfa stinging spider
Nos ta pika mata unbe.”                            We sting and kill immediately.




Migration
Due to poverty young men in particular would emigrate to look for work.” Some praised
this choice:

Si bo sinta na kas, bo no ta gana nada, paso’      Ifyou stay home, you will not receive anything,
Dios ta parti bendishon tur dia. Bo ta sintá den   because God shares blessings every day. You are
kas, bo ta keha ku bo tin hamber, bo no tin tra-   sitting at home, complaining that you are hun-
bou... Dios ta parti bendishon. Bo mester ta       gry, and you don’t have any work... God shares
eifó pa bo hana bendishon, pa bo hana trabou.”     blessings outside. Ifyou are outside, you will get
                                                   blessings, to get a job.


Following emancipation, people from the Caribbean islands, including many from
Curacao, constituted the labour force for countries in the region in need of seasonal or
temporary workers (Alofs and Dalhuisen 1997:157). Those recently freed, with neither
access to land or prospects were often the focus of agents sent by companies from abroad
to procure cheap labour.” The Latin-American rail network was one such destination for
these workers. Afro-Caribbeans living in extreme poverty were eager to leave their count-
ry and create a better life for themselves. In 1872, for example, 399 Curagaoans left to beco-
me labourers in the construction of the railway in Costa Rica (Römer 1977:48). Ten years
later it was the construction of the Panama Canal that attracted poor black workers from
Curacao. In 1882, 46 men left to become part of the 130,000 strong labour force from the


                                                                                                 199
English Caribbean working on the Panama Canal (Newton 1984:123-9). The following
year 62 Curacaoans left to work in Santo Domingo, mainly as cane cutters. In the begin-
ning of the twentieth century some workers also left to Suriname and to St. Eustatius.”
    Work opportunities in Cuba stimulated a massive migration of male Curagaoan labour-
ers. This exodus has been studied by Paula (1973) and Allen (2001a). Never before had
Curacaoans emigrated in such large numbers, despite economic conditions in the host
country not always being favourable. It is estimated that at the time around fifty per cent of
the male labour population emigrated to work in the cane fields on Cuba (Römer 1977).
There they were joined by a great number of people from the English Caribbean, Haiti,
Puerto Rico and some from the Dutch Windward Islands. The transfer of labour from
Curacao to Cuba started in 1917. The exodus came to its peak in 1919, when at least 1,900
men left Curacao to work for the colonias belonging to the Chaparra Sugar Company and
the Manati Sugar Company.”
     Studies on intra-Caribbean migrations from Curacao have mainly focused on the
underlying economic push and pull factors.” Fraser sees the migration culture of the
region as a kind of resistance: ‘people voted with their feet. Those leaving their home coun-
tries clearly showed their dissatisfaction with the circumstances in which they lived
(Palmer 1990:26). Economic factors indeed motivated the emigration of people from
Curagao. People left the island in search of work, while in some cases the migration proved
financially successful with some black families being able to buy land with the money they
had earned abroad. But the experience of migration went beyond the economic level. By
emigrating, they also aspired to a higher social status.
     These migrations were intended to be circular and not permanent. Sometimes, how-
ever, ‘temporary’ separations would last a lifetime, with the inherent consequences for
mothers, wives and partners. The tension experienced during departure is expressed in the
following song:

Mi ta bai mi ta bai mi ta bai ku shon          Iam going with the master
Ta ken lo mira mi mama bieu?                   But who would look after my old mother?
Demarara ta un tera leu                        Demerara is a far land
M’a puntra mi tata, mi tata n° sa di dje       I asked myfather,
M'a puntra mi mama, mi maman’ sa di dje        I have asked my mother
Mi ta bai mi ta bai ku shon                    But she does not know of it
Ta ken lo mira mi mama bieu?”                  But who would look after my old mother?


Those remaining behind often lived from hand to mouth in extreme poverty. The follow-
ing song also deals with the abandonment of women. The informant related this song to
the emigration of men to Cuba, but looking at the text it could have dealt with any type of
emigration, at the time taking place to countries such as Panama, Venezuela and Santo
Domingo. The following stanza expresses abandonment. The woman reflects on the
departure of her lover, who had not even told her that he was leaving.




200
Ai m'a subi un seru                               I climbed a tree
Ai m'a mira un barku                              I saw a boat
Rosa a bin bisami                                 Rosa came and told me
ku mi dalia ta na bordo                           that my lover was on board
Hisa bela                                         Set the sail
Hisa bela                                         Set the sail
hisa bela bo bat.”                                set the sail and go

The following narrative also displays this abandonment:

Mt tata a bai Cuba ora mi tabatin tres afia. Mi   My father left for Cuba when I was three. He
tata 1 mama tabata kasd na rat i na misa. Pero    and my mother were married both by Church
tog el'a bai Cuba ku un otro muhé, ku kende e     and by law. Yet he left to Cuba with another
tabatin un yu ku tabata 11 luna mas yòn ku mi.    woman with whom he had a child 11 months
Mi mama a keda atras e so. E no tabata manda      younger than I. My mother was left alone. He
sèn pa mi. Mi mama a traha pa kuida nos. Ta       did not send us any money either. My mother
den tempu ku muhénan tabata traha sombré di       worked to take care of
                                                                       us. It was during the time
kabana, ku nan tabata bende ku Arabir. Mi         that women used to make straw hats which they
mama tabata traha sombré. Mi tabata biba ku       sold to Arab merchants. My mother used to
mayornan di mi mama. Nan tabata yuda i            make hats. We lived with my mother’s parents.
kuida nos. Un parti di e plaka ku mi mama         They would also help to take care of us.
tabata gana ku trahamentu di sombré, e tabata     With part of the money my mother earned
hunga sam kuné.                                   through making hats she would play sam. A
Un muhé den bario tabata hunga sam. Ku e sèn      lady in my neighbourhood used to run the sam.
di sam ku e hana ora ta tok’é, e tabata kumpra    With the money she would receive from the
pafia i sapatu. Pa medio di e plaka di sam ei     sam,   when    it was her turn, she would buy
mes, mi mama a hana sèn pa lagami risibi. Dia     clothes and shoes. It was in this way that my
mi tata a bini bèk for di Cuba na 1927, tabata    mother received money for me to do my first
8 afia despues ku mi a risibi mi promé santa      communion. When my father came back from
komunion.”                                        Cuba in 1927, eight years later, I had already
                                                  done myfirst communion.


This story gives some evidence of how women survived by playing sam. It is a traditional
saving system in which a few people would participate by putting some money into a com-
munal pot when paid. Each member in rotation receives the total amount in the pot,
as agreed upon at the beginning. This would be coordinated by a person named kabes di
Sam.




The Role of Women in Material Life
The lives of women were hard. In the kunuku and on the plantations they were involved
in the fieldwork. Although women would often carry out the same tasks as men, they were
paid half the wage of men. Apart from work on the land, there was the possibility of work-
ing for the government authorities. They would, for example, carry water to male labour-
ers repairing the roads. Many women had to combine their work with caring for their chil-


                                                                                             201
dren and tending livestock. Mixed-farming was common practice, both on private land
and under the paga tera system. Most households had a few chickens and sometimes some
pigs. Goats in particular were considered a good investment; in the words of Fernando
Henriques: ‘the poor man’s moneybox’ (1953:24). The sale of a goat would help towards
paying the land rent. Or one could sell a goat in case of a funeral or to cover marriage
expenses.”
    Women were also involved in the daily domestic chores, such as looking after the chil-
dren, cleaning and preparing food. The major task in preparing meals was processing the
millet. Before cooking the millet, it took some time to separate the wheat from the chaff.
Following this it was ground in the metate or pounded in the tree-trunk mortar. Whilst
doing so, women would sing songs. By singing about their daily lives they could transcend
the difficulties they experienced. An informant underlined this by stating that when she
sang, she would forget her problems and life would seem bearable again. She sang the fol-
lowing song while pounding millet, the so-called kantika di bati maishi.”

Ai Dios, ta trabou di mata hende                      Oh Lord, it is work to kill people
esakinan.                                             this work.
Mi ta bai kunuku, eeeh.                               I will go to the countryside, eeeh.
Mi sin ta bint Punda mas.”                            I will never come to town again.


In rural communities in particular, women were responsible for economic activities out-
side the village. They, for example, determined the price of the harvest surplus and sold it.
Women would travel long distances on foot or on a donkey along roads in a bad state of
repair” to sell the crop surplus and to purchase supplies, such as brown sugar (suku di
klenku) and flour. The previously mentioned Ma Tuda from the most western part of the
island, used to walk from Westpunt to town” to sell the produce from her land. She
described the hardships involved:

E pianan aki a kana kaminda di Punda. Ten mi           These feet did walk to town, you know. When I
tabata mucha i despues ku mi a kasa, ta’a__ was a young girl I would do that and after I
meskos. Mi ta bai Punda ku karga riba mi    married it was the same. I would go to town
kabes. Un makutu yen di webu i kònkòmber. _ with a load on my head. A basket full of eggs
Mi ta traha kunuku, kue kònkòmber, patia,   and cucumbers. I would work on the land, reap
buta den makutu, buta riba kabes. Tin biaha            cucumber, watermelon, place them in a basket
áwaseru ta batibo na kaminda, muha bo pafia            and put that on my head. On your way to town
papa papa.    Ora awa pasa, bo tin ku kit’é, tros’é    it would sometimes rain, then you got soaking
i bolbe bisti mesun pana."                             wet. When it stopped raining, you had to take
                                                        off your clothes, wring them out, and put them
                                                        on again.

She related that after her husband died she also took on his workload; Ma Tuda continued
to go to town to sell her products. After having been able to buy a donkey she reached town
much faster so she could go there twice a week instead of once every two weeks.




202
Mi mes ta traha kunuku. Mi ta homber i mi ta      I worked the land myself. I am a man and
muhé tambe. Mi ta traha, kue patia, kue           woman at the same time. I would work, reap
komkomber, yena nan na makutu, pone nan           squash, cucumber, fill my baskets, place them
riba buriku, bai Punda. Mi tabata bai Punda,      on the donkey and go to town. I would go twice
dos biaha pa siman. Esei hende di antes tabata    a week to town. That is what people in the past
hasi. Traha ku sodó di nan frenta pa nan biba.”   used to do. To work from the sweat of their brow
                                                  to earn a living.

It was a common phenomenon that neighbours would pool their money and appoint
someone to do a bulk shop in town, a phenomenon known as shér. The appointed woman
would receive a list of items to be purchased. According to Rupert, mostly they were trust-
ed and respected women in the community. They had to be good negotiators to success-
fully deal with the merchants in town (Rupert 1999:76; Clemencia 1996:82).
     People farming in the eastern part of the island planted fruit and vegetables, such as
okra, perpetual spinach, string beans, calabash gourds, Curagaoan cucumbers and pump-
kins to be sold in town. Some of these farmers had wells and windmills." Rupert states that
from the eighteenth until the beginning of the twentieth century Afro-Curacaoan women
often peddled their merchandise in the streets of Willemstad. They would sell sweets and
other tasty food products, which they carried in a large basket on their heads while calling
out what they were selling.”
    Many women were involved in other activities providing an income (rende bida).®
Many studies mention the weaving of panama hats as an opportunity to earn a stable
income.” The production of these straw hats depended on the prevailing fashion and
therefore fluctuated over the years. After having fallen in the 1880s, the trade rose again by
the end of the nineteenth century and at the beginning of the twentieth century it became
an important export product popular in Europe, the United States, Barbados, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Guadeloupe and Venezuela. In schools set up by the Roman Catholic
Church young girls were taught the skill of weaving hats.” The cooperative of agriculture
also gave courses to women, who then instructed others in the countryside how to improve
their hat-making skills.” The hat weaving trade introduced a new workpattern for women.
They could stay at home and look after their children while weaving the hats. In the
kunuku women were thus no longer obliged to work on the salt-pans” or to do other ardu-
ous work after the planting and harvesting of millet was finished. Girls would learn to
weave hats at an early age and in that way helped with family finances. Especially in diffi-
cult times young girls would stay at home rather than attend school in order to help their
mothers weave hats. Other, more enterprising women would pay a third person to do part
of the work while they would finish the hat themselves.”
    There were three types of hats: the fine hats or sombré fini, the medium fine hat (som-
bré medio fini) and the rough hat, sombré brutu. The sombré brutu was worn while work-
ing on the land. An experienced hat maker would take two days to weave a hat; the less
experienced up to seven days. Women complained about the amount of work required for
weaving a hat and the physical strain involved: ‘M’a traha sombré te mi dedenan a bira un
banda’ (I wove hats until my fingers became crooked). But they had the chance to increase
their income by working faster and producing better quality hats.”



                                                                                              203
Most hats made on Curacao were rough hats, locally called sombré grof, sombré parotin or
sombré di Arabi. The last name stemmed from Syrian and Lebanese peddlers arriving on
the island at the end of the nineteenth century, known under the generic name of Arabi.
They collected these hats for selling. Maura Pieternella, born in the second district on 30
November 1907, remembered how her mother used to negotiate (negoshá) with these
Libanese peddlers over the price of her hats to ensure a good deal. Her father was a sailor
and would spend little time at home. She also relates her involvement as a small girl in this
economic activity.

R.A.: Sefiora a bisa tambe ku sefora a traha      R.A.: Madam, you told me that you wove hats
sombré komo mucha?                                when you were a little girl?
M.P.: Hopi. Tabata mi bida. Senora konosé         M.P.: Very much. That was my life. Do you
Eliya Arabi? E tabata biba na Penstraat. E tin    know Eliya, the Arab man who used to live in
negoshi na Penstraat. Negoshi di kabana. Anto     Penstraat [near Willemstad]? He had a business
mi mama ta tuma un par di kabana serka dje i      in Penstraat. A business in straw. And my
partié pa nos, pa mi ku mi ruman Ogenia. 12       mother used to take some straw from him, for
kabes di kabana pa nos bai traha. Nos ta yuda     me and my sister Ogenia. 12 pieces of straw to
otro. Den un siman nos ta kaba e sombrénan pa     weave hats. We would help each other. In a
djaweps ora Eliya ta bini djaweps bini tuma su    week, we would be finished with the hats, so
sombré. Den kareda di 10.00 or, nos ta kla.       that when the Arab Eliya came on Thursday to
                                                  fetch his hats, about 10 o’clock in the morning,
                                                  we would be finished.
R.A.: Kantu sén sefiora ta hafia?                 R.A.: How much did you earn?
M.P.: E sèn no ta mashá. Kada sombré ta 10        M.P.: The money was not much. For each hat
plaka (10 x 2 sèn 1 mei, ta 25 sèn) pa un. Kasi   we would get 25 cents. Next to nothing.
pornada bo ta traha.”


Women would also wash and iron clothes for wealthy families. In 1900, 11 per cent of the
female population was registered as washerwomen, while in 1910 this decreased to 7 per
cent. This was an arduous task as the clothes were washed by hand. The process depended
on the fabric. Sometimes the clothes were boiled to get the dirt out. White clothes were
bleached and spread out in a field. At the time most clothes were starched. Afterwards they
had to be ironed. Some women ironed exclusively. Ironing was very labour intensive, espe-
cially before 1934, when it involved the use of charcoal irons. Sometimes a woman had to
burn the charcoal first, which required knowledge of the type of trees to use and the
amount of time required for the charcoal burning process. The charcoal irons would be
filled with hot coals to heat up the base. The holes in the back of these irons regulated the
circulation of air to keep the embers burning. The irons were placed on a fire and had to
be heated periodically when used.
     An 83 year old informant who was interviewed in the late 1980s, recalled that as a
young girl she would be sent out to iron clothes. She started work at eight o'clock in the
morning and would finish at midnight. She focused on male clothes, as she could charge
up to two guilders for a suit, far more than for a dress. She stated that ‘Ta pafia di homber
ta’a yudami konopá i kinipf’ (The ironing of men’s clothes helped me make ends meet).”



204
Women also worked as yaya’s for the coloured and white elite families in town. In this way
some managed to escape poverty, like the nanny I interviewed who had left in 1913 to work
for a Jewish family in Cuba. There she earned forty dollars per month — much more than
the five guilders she could earn on the island as a nanny and far more than she could get
for weaving hats. She had to leave her only child behind, but sent her money and goods.
Interviews with some of these former nannies reveal that their work would sometimes
involve several families” This was something in which they took great pride, such as is
apparent in the following account:

C.K.: Despues ku mi mama a muri, ma bai          C.K.: After my mother died, I went to work in
Punda. Mi tabata yaya di yu. M’a mira nietu di   Punda. I was a nanny. I was a nanny for the
Shon Leyba. M’a mira Doctor Capriles su          grandchildren of shon Leyba. I also looked after
nietunan. Mi a keda kada un di e lugánan ei 6    the grandchildren of Doctor Capriles. I stayed
ana. Mi ta keda na trabou, mi no sa bini         six years at each of those places. Sometimes I
kunuku. De bes en kuando mi ta bini kunuku       would go to the countryside to visit my father.
pa mira mi tata.
E.J.: Kuantu ta’a gana?                          E.J.: How much did you earn?
C.K.: Tres heldu pa luna. Ma por a biba. Bo ta   C.K.: Three guilders per month but you could
hana tur kos di kumpra.                          live. You could buy everything.
E.J.: Tabata hatia kuminda?                      E.J.: Did you get food?
C.K.: Si, ku kuminda.”                           C.K.: Yes, with food.



Romer (1976) considers these nannies a link between western and African culture and as
such they represent keyfigures in the creolization process in Curagaoan society. Nannies
played an important role as transmitters of Afro-Curagaoan cultural elements. They were
very close to the children in their care as they would look after them all day and at night
sleep beside their beds on the floor. In this role, they were able to pass on cultural elements
and values which differed from the ‘white’ environment in which the children lived. They
told them Nanzi stories because these could transcend class and ethnic barriers, and as
such these oral traditions achieved the status of collective property for the ruling class and
the subjugated alike.
    Some women talked about their experiences as a yaya with much pride. An informant
stated that she had enjoyed being a yaya, as this involved her in all matters regarding the
children (‘Ora bo ta yaya bo ta den tur kos’; when you are a yaya you are in everything).
She attended all parties with the family and was dressed according to the latest fashion.
Due to their close relation to the employer, nannies tended to look down on the other ser-
vants. Yaya’s returning from abroad with their employers assumed an air of importance.
Witteveen’s most recent study on yaya’s (2006), however, shows that their situation was not
as rosy as it may have seemed. In particular those who had given up the work, as they had
been unable to abide by the rules, would openly reveal the negative aspects. They had lit-
tle time to themselves and had to be at the family’s beck and call, day and night. Others
claimed in retrospect that they had had to sacrifice their private lives, having remained
unmarried and childless in order to keep the job.



                                                                                             205
Another type of work was carried out by the menchi: a woman employed to breastfeed a
child, mostly of elite families. The following account comes from a lady whose mother was
a menchi for a plantation owner.


Tempu mi mama a hanami, esei ta mi mama a            When my mother gave birth to me, she told me
kontami, un di e shonnan a haa un yu hom-            that one of the plantation owners had given
ber, nan a yam’é Frank. No ku mi konos’é, bo         birth to a son. His name was Frank. I don’t
sa, e shonnan no ta buska hende manera mi pa         know him, you know, the owners do not need
konosé komo ruman di lechi. Mi mama tabata           someone like me to be recognized as their milk-
duna e Frank ei, krvé ku mi lechi. Anto mama         sibling. My mother used to breastfeed him with
no por kome nada pa e yu ei no hana mal di           my milk. And mother was not allowed to eat
barika. E shon a eksigi di mi mama, un pechu         anything so that the child would not get stom-
ta pa mi, un pechu ta pa e shon. Tempu di ka-        ach problems. The owner demanded that one
tibu, no. Tempu di katibu, no. Ami ta yam'é          breast be mine, and the other one his son’s. Slav-
asina pasó awor aki ta kua hende ta bai tuma e       ery time, slavery time. I call it so, because nowa-
kos ei? Tur eseinan... Ora nan a eksigi mi mama      days nobody would accept that. All that... When
asina, mi mama    di no, anto e yu tin ku muri.      the owner demanded that of my mother, she
Ku e no por bebe kaminda mi yu ta bebe, mi no        said no, then your child will have to die. If he
ta dun’é. Anto nan a ens, pasó-e shon no ta          cannot drink at the same breast as my child
duna niun yu lechi. Anto e ora ei mama a sigui       does, I am not giving him any milk. Then they
dun’é lechi.”                                        agreed, because the shon does not breastfeed any
                                                     of her children. Then my mother continued to
                                                     give him milk.


Some women, both in town and in the countryside, had the opportunity to open small
shops and thus become entrepreneurs. They would sell products such as flour, sugar, bis-
cuits and coffee, which had become popular. Sometimes women                   in town would act as
intermediaries for farmers wishing to sell their produce, as was the case with fifty year old
Carolina, who agreed to sell milk in town for the land owner Cohen Henriquez — she was
paid ten per cent of the sale price.” In town, for example, women would chop meat for
people in shops or would carry people’s faeces in buckets to dispose of in the sea.

The notion of autonomy that this afforded was related in an interview with a woman born
in 1900 who had owned a small shop in Otrobanda. Here she explains her desire to work
for herself:

Mi n’ bai traha pa niun hende pasombra mi nv         I have not gone to work for anybody because I
ta wanta niun hende hasi abusu di mi. Mi ta          cannot bear people taking advantage of me. I
traha riba mi mes. Mi mama a sifiami traha           work on my own. My mother taught me to do
tur kos. Traha bolo, tur kos el a sifiami. Despues   everything. To bake, everything she taught me.
el a siftami kose. Ma sina kose. Mi a kumpra         Afterwards she taught me to sew. I learned to
un mashin di kose.”                                  sew. I bought a sewing machine.

It was not easy to accurately establish the number of female shop owners at the beginning
of the twentieth century. I attempted to deduce this from an article in the newspaper


206
La Cruz in 1918 listing shop owners in the kunuku who besides common goods sold cig-
arettes.


      Table 7.5 Overview of Shopkeepers in the Kunuku


                                                                 Geographical position
            Name                           Place                 on the island
[1          Bechi Laurends                 Westpunt              Banda Bou
  2    |     ee          Matheu            Kas Abou        “ae   Banda Bou
| 5 Le Djerri Helmeyer                     Willibrordu           Banda Bou
  4         Julus Helmeyer                 Mahuma          aa    Middle of the island
E           Evelina Willem         on      Kamina Nobo           Middle of the island      ;
  6         Anita de Lanoy                 Seru Fortuna    En. Middle of the island
  i         Maria Jansen                   Bou di Barber         Banda Bou

  8         Shon Walle                     Sta Rosa              Banda Riba
  9         Catalina Merkis                Montana               Banda Riba
            Pablo Ruiz                  Sta Maria                Middle of the island
                                       EE
      Source: La Cruz, December 1918



The names indicate that about fifty per cent of these shops were owned by women. How-
ever, this gives only a rough indication as it concerns shops where one could buy cigarettes,
a new product on the market. It is probable that these were the more enterprising shop-
keepers.
     Some of these women were also known to sell alcohol, sometimes without a permit and
thus illegally (Rutten 1989:47). In 1863, for example, Elba Naar was accused of selling alco-
hol to some policemen on plantation Barber. She was, however, able to avoid prosecution
by telling the authorities that she had only offered the men some drinks free of charge as
they were nice people who did their job diligently.” Women were also primarily responsi-
ble for organizing dances with an admittance fee, an illegal activity. In 1901 all seven peo-
ple who were fined for organizing a dance party in a public place without permission, were
women (Koloniale Verslagen 1903).
     In addition, women had the opportunity to become teaching assistants for the nuns
who taught the children at school. These teaching assistants were young, lower class
women, who had been instructed by the Roman Catholic Church. They received some
education in reading and writing and had to live a respectable life. Any rumours or gossip
about them could lead to their dismissal.
     Finally, through midwivery women could earn a stable income. In 1874 a large group
of traditional midwives from all over the island were given a legal permit to offer mid-
wivery services.” Most of these women had acquired their knowledge and skills from fam-
ily members, often during slavery. They were respected by the community they served. In
1995 I was able to interview a ninety year old woman from a long line of midwives on the


                                                                                         207
island. Her great-grandmother, who had also been a midwife, was the daughter of a mid-
wife called Bachilie Antonia Ignacio in Buitenbosch (the eastern part of the island). In a
letter dated 3 May 1868 the district master petitioned the government to give Bachilie
some financial support because of the help she had offered both during and after child-
birth to many slaves and freedwomen of the poorer class."



Conclusion

In this Chapter I looked at how Afro-Curagaoans managed to survive economically. The
recurring economic difficulties of the island with its ecological challenges made life for
most Afro-Curacaoans a real struggle and this group remained economically very vulne-
rable. The constant search for a livelihood is captured by the Papiamentu term ‘buska bida,
through which Afro-Curacaoans defined their situation. The term implies a creative
action, which also typifies the economic life of this group. On the practical level buska bida
manifested itself in resistance to and confrontation against land owners, district masters
and sometimes even Roman Catholic priests, as well as in negotiation with these authori-
ties.
      This search for a livelihood involved a constant search for land, for food and for wage
labour by both men and women. Those who remained on plantations complained about
the control exercised by the owners. It was not the unpaid work for the plantation owners
they resented, but rather that they had to, when natural circumstances were favourable
(principally during the rainy season), pay attention to the land of the owner before they
could tend their own. The intrusion in their private life, with domination extending over
their children, generated much more antagonism than the Church’s involvement in their
lives. A reason for this may be that, as we have seen, the Church also worked in helping out
people in need.
      Attaining a piece of land helped people to become in a sense autonomous. Land had
an enormous significance for Afro-Curagaoans, in the extreme form manifested in the
symbolic attitude of reverence towards what was called ‘tera di famia’ (family land). Some
people were able to practice agriculture or fishing and could in that way participate in an
autonomous subsistence economy, usually on the basis of their traditional knowledge and
skills. Sometimes, in periods of drought, they had to turn to local plantation owners for
work in order to survive. There was a continuous urge for self-reliance expressed in the
tendency to leave the countryside and move to town. Sometimes this was part of an intern-
al migration flow, which later turned into an external one, with many men leaving the
island in search of work.
      Both those in town and in the countryside undertook all types of activities and servic-
es in demand at the time, some of which do not appear in the statistics. Next to more reg-
ular jobs such as dockworker, nanny, washerwoman, ironer and seamstress, people would,
for example, use their knowledge of medicinal herbs to cure people, lay out the deceased,
perform as singers or musicians, or carry the faeces of people to the sea. In that way men
as well as women were active in supporting the household, be it by working for a salary, by
bartering or by carrying out reciprocal land labour services.


208
In dealing with these economical challenges, Afro-Curagaoans created the hybrid condi-
tions of their own ways of life. Here economics were not the only aspect that mattered.
Some freedpeople, who did not hold any social position in regular society, were able to
assume positions of leadership within their communities and were greatly respected
because of the creativity and perseverance they invested in organizing their lives after
slavery.



Notes

1   The word ‘kunukw’ refers to a plot of land where crops are planted and to rural areas outside
    town.
    La Cruz, 24-6-1914.
    Interview Altagracia Regina (granddaughter of Ma Yaya Felipa, born 2-5-1910), Brenneker, 20-
    1-1983 (T 87, Fundashon Biblioteka Publiko Korsou).
    Interview Louis Lourens (born 1879, Willemstad), Brenneker, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 524,
    NatAr).
    Broek 1990. Between 1920 and 1935 the Afro-Curagaoan authors Willem Eligio Kroon, Manuel
    Antonio Fraai and Simon Miguel Suriel wrote short stories in La Union, aimed at morally
    instructing Afro-Curacaoans.
    Johannes Martes Kasiano from Plantation Blauw, for example, who was stabbed on Christmas
    Eve 1870, was also known as Johannes di Blauw (NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van
    Strafzaken 1878, Procesverbaal no. 24).
    After the birth of a child a deep hole was dug in the mother’s yard, in which the umbilical cord
    and afterbirth were burried. Interview Nana Demalia (born 1873, Seru di Mahuma), Brenne-
    ker/Juliana, 1959, (Zikinzá-collection, T 474, NatAr).
    Land as an object of wealth is also present in one of the four earliest published Nanzi stories, in
    1899. In the story Kompa Nanzi i e popchi di breu (Nanzi and the tar doll), Nanzi goes out to steal
    fruit for his hungry family on the estate of the king, which has all types of tropical fruits in abun-
    dance. Cuenta di Nansi 1899:104-6.
    NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6739,23-8-1864/554.
    NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, inv. no. 132, 12-10-1874/40
    and 4-12-1874/49. However, this case also reveals that the governor did not see the words of the
   district master as final: he asked him in another letter to elaborate on the objections against
   Apostel, to which the district master complied.
11 Similar reactions were given to petitions of other people (NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement,
    Brievenboeken 2e district, inv. no. 133, 20-6-1876/48, 18-10-1876/86).
12 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no. 126, 6-8-1864/83 and
    20-8-1864/86; inv. no. 35, Beschikking Gouvernement van Curacao en onderhorigheden, 23-8-
    1864/554. The district master made this decision in an attempt to stop people from dispersing.
13 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 3e district, inv. no. 139, 14-4-1864/49.
14 NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6783, 29-5-1885/281. See letter finance admi-
   nistrator to governor, 14-5-1892/212, 150 (NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Administratie
   van Financién, 1892, inv. no. 37).
15 Minutes meeting of Society of Agriculturists, 24-11-1909 (Koloniaal Verslag 1910).
16 NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6783, 29-5-1885/281. See also letter finance
    administrator to governor, 14-5-1892, no. 212/50 in which he explicitly states this problem
    (NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Administratie van Financién, 1892, inv. no. 37).




                                                                                                      209
                                                                                 inv. no. 6788,
      NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, Gouvernementsjournaal van Curagao, 1890-1891,
      27-2-1890/128.
      Interview Brenneker/Juliana, probably 1958 or 1959, as most of the interviews were done in
      those years. (Zikinzá-collection, T 34, NatAr). Unfortunately no age or name of the male infor-
      mant was registered. Nevertheless I have chosen to include this due to its vivid description of
      plantation life.
      NA, Ministerie van Koloniën, Gouvernementsjournaal van Curacao, 1890-1891, inv. no. 6788,
      27-2-1890/128. The finance administrator stated in this letter to the governor that before eman-
      cipation freed blacks had had the unwritten right to settle on the “Savaan Westpunt’ to build
      homes and practice agriculture. This right was hereditary but according to the administrator the
      situation was getting out of hand (NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Administratie van
      Financiën, 1892, inv. no. 37, 14-5-1892/212).
      Interview Geertruda Alberto, also called Ma Tuda (born 1883), Allen, 30-8-1983 (NatAr).
      The plantation owner referred to him as ‘certain Martili from Savaan Bulumonte!
      NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Districtbeheer. Ingekomen stukken 2e-en 3e district, inv.
      no. 102, 9-12-1909.
      Renkema      1981a:157; NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement,Brievenboeken     4e district, inv. no.
      151, 27-2-1890/128.
      Interview Geertruda Alberto (Ma Tuda) (born 1883), Allen, 3-8-1983 (NatAr).
      NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, inv. no 131, 26-4-1864/28.
      NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no. 125, 23-5-1863/5. See
      also NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Administratie van Financién, 1892, inv. no. 37, 16-
      12-1895/162.
27 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken, 3e district, 1863-1906, inv. no. 139, 26-4-
      1864/56. According to the commissioner of the third district also in his district people were cul-
      tivating land without legal proof or permit.
28 NA, Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6734, 31-12-1862/906.
29 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no. 127, 3 -10-1867/143.
      See also Koloniale Verslagen 1910 [KITLV].: under the heading ‘animal husbandry’ this pheno-
      menon was also described.
30    NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, inv. no. 131, 16-5-1863/3.
31    NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no. 125, 23-5-1863/5.
32    NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 3 district. no. 140, 5-3-1866/9.
33    See letter district master to deputy Procuror General (NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement,
      Brievenboekenen 5e district, 1863-1904, inv. no 126, 26-4-1866/45).
34    NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no. 126, 22-12-1865/137;
      inv. no. 127, 27-4-1866/46 and 25-3-1867/48.
3N5) Interview Eduardo Tokaai (born 1899), Allen, 12-9-1984 (NatAr).
36 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e en 3e district, inv. no. 168 20-
      2-1912/44.
B     The mondi is an area of wild growth, with a small variety of trees, such as watapana, brasil wood
      and kibra hacha trees. The mondi is also important for food gathering. One may find here fruit
      of the cactus milon di seru (Melocactus), the infrou (Opuntiia werntiana), the datu (Lemairece-
      reus griseus), the kadushi (Cereus repandus), the karawara (Cordia alba R. et Sch.) and the mari-
      pompun (Omphalophthalmum rubum karst). As well as a provider of food, the forest is also re-
      cognized as a place where particular supernatural beings are said to dwell, also known as spiritu.
38 Interview Simon Bonifacio (born 1908) and Clemence Bonifacio (born 1907), Allen/F. Muizen-
    berg, 9-5-1989 (NatAr).
oY) NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e en 3e district, inv. no. 168 20-
    2-1912/44. See also interview Maria Antersijn-Martina (born 1910), Allen, 29-5-1992 (NatAr).
40 Interview Maria Antersijn-Martina (born 1910), Allen, 29-5-1992 (NatAr).



210
   Went 1902 (Appendix V, KV 1902, p. 46); Rijkens 1907; Kakebeeke 1912.
   See La Cruz, 28-1-1903 (a comment on the report written by Went).
   Ustilago is a kind of fungi which causes harm to the millet.
   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e en 3e district, inv. no. 169, 18-5-1914,
   no. 140.
   Spanjers (1981:6-7) states that between 1830 and 1982 — except 11 years, when no measurement
   of rain was taken — the average rainfall was 575 mm. In the period 1830-1914 the average rain-
   fall was 574.1 mm. The period of this study, 1863-1917, saw 28 years with a rainfall below aver-
   age.
   Renkema 1981a:361-3; van Soest 1977:20; Koot 1979:44, 54; Dekker 1982:98; Pietersz 1985.
47 Koloniaal Verslag 1912 . The importance of these dams in society is manifested in the saying
   “Traha dam, warda awa’ (Building a dam to save water), meaning it is necessary to save when the
   possibility arises.
48   Benjamins, 1914-1917:457; Koloniaal Verslag 1908. This type could already be harvested in Janu-
   ary, the other one not until March or April. However, people complained that the maishi rabu
   could easily be destroyed by worms.
49 Pencheon (2000) states that the bull play of St. Kitts is a folk drama representing a true incident
   which occurred around 1917 at the Belmont sugar plantation. No information has been received
   on whether the bull play in Curacao was based on a true incident. However, in some oral narra-
   tives bulls were mentioned as terrors of the plantations and some informants recalled how peo-
   ple were killed by enraged bulls. Also cows were used to deter naughty children. Pencheon also
   states that in West-African culture the cowhead figure represents strength, power and authority.
50 La Union, 3-4-1890.
ill NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Minuten van uitgaande stukken 2e district, inv. no. 190,
     23-3-1927.
52 Boeke was sent to the Caribbean for nine months by the minister of Colonies (Weber 1921:215).
93 Van Breemen 1909a en b.
54 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no. 126, 1-9-1867/90.
55 Van Breemen 1909b.
56 A ‘reda is a fishing net with cork floats and weighted at the bottom with lead or stone.
57 Interview Emil Paulo (born 1890), Allen, 23-8-1983 (NatAr). Paulo was an important dojfio di
     reda in Westpunt.
58 Interview Carlitu Martina (born 1905), Brenneker/Juliana, 25-4-1984 (T 101, Fundashon Biblio-
   teka Publiko Korsou).
59 Interview Emil Paulo (born 1890), Allen, 23-8-1983 (NatAr).
60 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no. 125, 13-4-1864/21.
61 Interview Brenneker/Juliana, probably 1958 or 1959, as most of the interviews were done in
   those years. (Zikinzá-collection, T 34, NatAr). Unfortunately no age or name of the male
   informant was registered. Nevertheless I have chosen to include this due to its vivid description
   of plantation life.
62 Rijkens 1907; Römer 1977:43. The Curagaose Courant of 24-3-1888 published an announcement
   of the owner of a furniture factory in Puerto Rico looking for skilled fine carpenters to come and
   work in Puerto Rico. This announcement re-appeared six times in the newspaper. It shows a will-
   ingness to employ these workers abroad but the number of times the ad appeared seems to indi-
   cate that at the time carpenters were reluctant to leave.
63 Interview Didi Sluis (born 1904), Allen, 15-5-1984 (NatAr).
64 In 1905 the Church dedicated a series of eight stories to a man who went to town to work: La
     Cruz, 18-1-1905, 25-1-1905, 1-2-1905, 8-2-1905, 15-2-1905, 22-2-1905, 29-3-1905 and 5-4-1905.
     The man was unsatisfied with his life in the kunuku and wanted to go and live in town. The fact
     that so many stories were told relating to this subject showed that the Church was against this
     urban migration. Town was seen as a place where trouble prevailed.



                                                                                                  211
65 Interview B. Kirindongo (born 1924), Allen, 2-2-2000 (NatAr).
66 Interview Lucita Emanuel (born 1909), Allen, 16-5-1989 (NatAr).
67 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e en 3e district, inv. no. 169, 18-5-
   1914/140.
68 Interview Lorensio Fernando (born 1902), Brenneker/Juliana, 31-10-1985 (T 114, Fundashon
     Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
69 Soon after emancipation people started leaving the country. On 9-7-1863 a labour agreement
     was made between 25 freedpeople and a Venezolean employer to work in Venezuela. On 10-7-
     1863 and 16-7-1863 agreements were made with 25 Curacaoan men to sail the river in Vene-
     zuela with lighters in order to transport products (NatAr, Notariële protocollen, 9-7-1863, Not.
     Akte, Inv. 53, no.151; Notariële protocollen, 10-7-1863, Not. Akte, Inv. 53, no.155; Notariële pro-
     tocollen, 17-7-1863, Not. Akte Inv. 53, 159.
70 Van Soest 1977:20; Koot 1979:44, 54; Dekker 1982:98; Pietersz 1985.
71 After Cuba was struck by the sugar crisis in 1921 a large number of Curacaoans returned. The
     Curacaoan-Cuban migration of cane workers consisted essentially of working-class males. Most
     women remained at home. Some were driven into extreme poverty, surviving on a meagre inco-
   me derived from weaving straw hats (Allen 1992).
72 Van Soest 1977:20; Koot 1979:44, 54; Dekker 1982:98; Pieters 1985.
73 Interview Cai Maduro (date of birth not registered), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collec-
     tion, T 704, NatAr).
74   Oral History Project in preparation of the documentary ‘Bosnan skondi’ (Hidden Voices) by
     Jeanne Henriquez and Rose Mary Allen, July 1992, Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology
   of the Netherlands Antilles and Centre for the Development of Women (SEDA). See also inter-
   view Mathilda Francisca (date of birth not registered, Santa Martha Grandi, Banda Bou), Bren-
   neker/Juliana (undated interview; Zikinzá-collection, T 231, NatAr).
WS Interview Imelda Valerianus (born 1915), Allen, 6-6-1992 (NatAr).
76 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, inv. no. 138, 7-4-1903/54 and
   Brievenboeken 2e en 3e district inv. no. 168, 20-2-1912/44.
VI Songs were named after the activities performed. The songs for pounding millet were sung while
     rhythmically pounding the millet in the tree-trunk mortar. There were also songs for grinding
     millet in the metate called kantika di mula maishi. And there were songs to accompany the
    pounding of cactus (kadushi) with the mortar called tati: kantika di tati (songs to pound cactus).
78 Interview Isabel Valks (born 1906), Allen, 13-3-1984 (NatAr).
19) The Amigoe (5-5-1886) published an overview of the poor condition of the roads, particularly in
     the western part of the island. The road from Savaneta to Westpunt was very bad, as was the one
     from Lagun via Knip to Westpunt. On Santa Martha all roads to the north were impassable. The
     road from Porto Mari to Ascencion was full of holes. The one from Salina to Klein Fontein and
     over the hill of Sebastiaan could not be passed by cart, and a pedestrian found no space to give
     way to a cart.
80   According to van Kol (1901) this walk took around fourteen hours.
81   Interview Geertruda Alberto (Ma Tuda), (born 1883), Allen, 30-8-1983 (NatAr).
82   Interview Geertruda Alberto (Ma Tuda), (born 1883), Allen, 30-8-1983 (NatAr).
83   In 1919 the cooperative of agriculture subsidized the digging of wells. Previously this expense
     was in the hands of the farmer (NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e en 3e
     district inv. no. 168, 20-2-1912/44). Kakebeeke (1912:5) states that two of the hired plots of land
   in the western part of the island had a windmill, against 48 plots with windmills in the eastern
   part. On these plots people would plant vegetables to sell in town.
84 Rupert recalls a certain Ma Labertina who lived at the end of the nineteenth century/beginning
   twentieth century and who was also mentioned in de Pool (1935:271; Rupert 1999:60-1).
85 Through these activities they could make an inccme for the day (saka dia). They
                                                                                        would also
   make ends meet by engaging in one activity to compensate another (dal vla saka vla ip



Ze
86 Catalogus 1913; Rustige 1934; van der Veen 1984; Rupert 1999; Henriquez 2002.
87 Before using the raw material a woman had to clean it, strip it (take off the hard exterior) and
     cut the straw into strips. The type of material used depended on the type of hat. Because the
     straw had to remain wet as it was woven the woman continuously dampened it with a cloth
     soaked in lemon water. One would start with the middle part of the hat called the rushi. Accord-
     ing to the particular model, there were different kinds of rushi. They had local names such as
     rushi kokolishi, rushi Henriquez, knoopsgat and Pietermai. Afterwards one would elaborate
     around the rushi in the form of a series of circles. Every time a new straw was added, this was
     called kresida. When this was finished, one made the crown (bol) and the brim. The last part,
   called the bor, was done in several ways, depending on the type of hat. The amount of time it
   took to make a hat varied and depended on the model. After the hat was finished, it was washed
   with soap and allowed to bleach in the sun for a few hours. For extra whitening it was placed in
   a bath of sulphur during the night after which it would be placed in the sun to dry. The finer hat
   was given a finishing touch by ironing it or hitting it with a special hammer.
88 Rustige 1934; van der Veen 1984; Rupert 1999; Henriquez 2002. In 1920 the cooperative of fema-
   le hat makers ‘Arbeid Adelt’ (Work gives honour) was founded (until 1924).
89 They worked the land, they loaded the salt. Their role in this was so important that it was men-
     tioned in Catalogus 1913:59.
90   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken, Criminele en Correctionele Teregt-
   zitting 1872, Procesverbaal no. 31.
91 Locally these hats were given names relating to the fineness of the weave. The finer hats were also
   known as Rouville, Nuyens and Gentleman, the first two having been governors of the island.
   Such a hat could cost between five and twelve and a half guilders. The medium fine hats were
   locally known by the names Ola, Kastol and Kompa.
92 Interview Maura Pieternella (born 30-11-1907), Allen, 16-4-1996 (NatAr).
93 Interview Frida Streedels (83 years of age in the late 1980s), 1980 (NatAr). This (undated) inter-
   view was conducted by Sonia Garmers.
94 Interview Eleonora Hermes (born 1883), Allen, 14-5-1986 (NatAr).
95 Interview Clementina Kirindongo (born 25-10-1878), Brenneker/Juliana, 27-9-1977 (T 54,
   Fundashon Biblioteka Publiko di Korsou).
96 Interview Ini Sirvanie (born 1-4-1910), Allen, 27-11-1989 (NatAr).
97 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken, Criminele en Correctionele Teregtzit-
   ting 5-5-1874, Procesverbaal no, 24.
98 Interview Maria (who refused to reveal her family name, born 1900), Allen, 22-9-1988 (NatAr).
oy NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no. 125, 18-9-1863/53.
100 NA, Ministerie van Kolonien, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6747, 9-4-1874/161 (14 women were appoint-
    ed), 21-4-1874/181 (21 women were appointed). In 1874 the government legalized midwivery.
    The names of these midwives were given by the district masters, who knew them. The letters of
    recommendation were sent to the members of the Medical Council.
101 Els Langenfeld, 2001a. See also NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 4e district,
    inv.61. 3-5-1868. In my conversation with this woman she informed me that many midwives had
    extensive knowledge of childbirth. Birthing customs were passed on from generation to genera-
    tion. Midwives were knowledgeable about the use of different types of herbs during and after
    pregnancy. For example, during nine days following the birth, the mother should drink a con-
     coction made of leaves from the welensali, basora pretu and karawara blanku-tree for the reco-
     very of the womb and to prevent infections. She also had to take a herbal bath (soba or tuma
     sodó). For this, a tub was filled with the hot liquid of these leaves. The woman assumed a squat-
     ting position above the tub, allowing the hot steam to enter the womb and cleanse it. Interview
     Aniceta (Yeta) Albertus (born 17-5-1902 in Willibrordus), Allen, 2-9-1984 (NatAr).




                                                                                                   DS
ne   ‘
CHAPTER VIII
Biba un Bida Drechi:
Living a Respectable Life



The previous Chapter addressed the daily economic life of Afro-Curacaoans in order to
draw attention to their resilience in the face of the hardships they encountered. Through
necessity, Afro-Curacaoan women in particular participated actively in a wide range of
economic activities, thus putting their shoulders to the wheel to help provide for their fam-
ilies.
     Caribbean family structures and relationships have received much attention from
scholars (Clarke 1957; Barrow 1996). For Curacao, one pioneering study has been that of
Abraham-van der Mark (1973), focusing on relationships between the sexes and the dif-
ferent types of union formed in the twentieth century. The author shows an interest in the
pattern of development of non-legal unions among Afro-Curagaoans and the matrifocal
family structure, suggesting a general male marginality. She looks at matrifocality as the
type of household in which a woman lives alone with her children — and sometimes grand-
children — without the presence of a male, or with a male who does not provide for his
family (Abraham-van      der Mark   1973:38). In 1965 and 1966 A.F. Marks (1973) also
researched family life on Curacao, focusing on Afro-Curagaoan matrifocal families in the
twentieth century.
    To date few studies have looked at how families developed during slavery and after
emancipation. It was commonly thought that slaves lacked stable family values and there-
fore a durable family life. However, a study by Han Jordaan (1999:474) shows that a vari-
ety of family constructs were upheld. Apart from the female-headed household there were
individuals sharing the same roof with couples and/or nuclear family units, consisting of
father, mother and children. Studies in Jamaica on family organizations show that the
nuclear form of family was also present among many Jamaican slaves in the early part of
the nineteenth century, deriving from monogamous practices which were, however, dif-
ferent from those in the metropole. In the Caribbean there was a pattern of sequential
monogamy, implying that slaves usually spent their adult life in several successive rela-
tionships (Beckles and Shepherd 1991:209-21).
    Following emancipation, the State and particularly the Roman Catholic Church,
increased efforts to influence relationships between the sexes and family life of Afro-
Curagaoans. The term ‘bida drechi’ was introduced by Catholic authorities, introducing set
values regarding proper family relationships. It was the opposite of the biba den pika (liv-
ing in sin). One had, for example, to regulate one’s sexual life through marriage. A man
and a woman cohabiting thus had to marry in the eyes of the law and of the Church so


                                                                                         ANS)
that they could form a respectable nuclear family. ‘Bida drechi’ was also applicable to sin-
gle people still living with their parents: it gave an ideal image of the relationship between
a man and a woman.
    The findings by Jordaan dismissed the idea put forward in many studies on family life,
namely that the enslaved did not know and appreciate the nuclear family pattern as a fam-
ily form. Most studies focused on the contrast between the idealized but uncommon
nuclear family relationship between a man and a woman and the dominant female-head-
ed household (Abraham-van der Mark 1973; Marks 1973).
    The aforementioned author Abraham-van der Mark concluded that Afro-Curagaoans
had internalized and idealized the value of a nuclear family pattern and that they consi-
dered those not living accordingly a common failure (1973). The scholars Linda Terpstra
and Anke van Dijk (1987) reject this position and claim that many Afro-Curagaoan
women preferred the position as the pivotal member of the family. In that way they were
not dependent on a man who might fail to take care of his family due to social circum-
stances or sometimes out of choice.
    Abraham-van der Mark records two terms which she states were used to describe the
male-female relationship on Curacao: 1) kompand, where a man and a woman cohabit,
and 2) bibd, where a couple lives separately and the man visits the woman from time to
time. Although in interviews elderly people would refer to ‘biba’ or ‘kompaná’ as the same
form of cohabitation, the term ‘bibá’ is a direct description of the couple’s living arrange-
ment and therefore not considered a word suitable to use in public. It was therefore
masked by the more indirect term ‘kompana’ thus a way of masking that a couple was liv-
ing without being married. It was also used to mask the relationship between a man and a
woman where the man would visit his partner occasionally, maybe because he was already
married. Using the term ‘kompaná’ instead of “biba’ underscores the idea that it was not
considered a respectable way of life. Indirectly it sustains Abraham-van der Mark’s per-
ception of marriage as the idealized form of male-female relationships.
    People would manifest their preference for marital relationships in other ways as well.
According to Brenneker, in the neighbourhood called Seru Fortuna, there were cases where
people were chased away when they were found cohabiting (1961:35). An incident in 1890
led to a court case: a man called Koeiman was taken to court after he had gone to the home
of Maria Rosalie on the afternoon of Sunday 8 June 1890 and being angry, had broken
down the roof of her house after having shouted that he did not want her to continue liv-
ing in an unlawful relationship with a certain Leon on his land.
    The Papiamentu proverb ‘Miho un bon bibá ku un mal kasd’ (It is better to live in a
good concubine than in a bad marriage) clearly throws a different light on the value attrib-
uted to marriage and cohabiting than the concept of bida drechi.2 The following banderi-
ta also gives further insight into these matters:

Dalia bo ta bai                                 Dalia (my love) you are going
Dalia bo a hasi bon di bai                      You did well to go
      : a traha dos porta
Karpinté                                        The carpenter made two doors
pa sali un malu drenta bon.                     so when the bad leaves, the good enters.



216
The Church and the Afro-Curacaoan people clearly had different views regarding the
structure of marital relationships. These behavioral paradoxes show the complexity of
male-female relations and bring us to the question: what did family life really represent for
Afro-Curacaoans after emancipation? How did they interpret what was meant by bida
drechi and how did this manifest itself in their daily family lives?



Gender Roles

The organization of the family was expected to revolve around the concept of ‘bida drechi’
a respectable life. This seems to imply that bida drechi and the values it upheld concur with
what Peter Wilson (1973) called respectability. Wilson sees respectability as the moral force
behind the coercive power of colonialism and neo-colonialism, which is dominated by the
value system of the Church. Respectability is exemplified by the island’s small middle class
and by women of all social classes, for whom the Church is the principal social domain.
Men being less devout than women were in the main excluded from this social platform
(1973:102).
      Living a bida drechi, however, implied much more than marrying and attending
 Church. The Roman Catholic clergy recognized that considerable effort was required to
 attain a bida drechi and tried in many ways to influence this, including through the intro-
 duction of guidelines outlining how men, and especially women, should behave as indi-
 viduals and as a married couple. For women the Church preached a cult of domesticity,
 respectability and pureness, which it attempted to instill from an early age. In this way it
worked towards institutionalizing the subordinate position of women, thus realizing patri-
 archal dominance within the family. Men’s perceptions of the correct behaviour of women
would determine the way in which they behaved towards them. The assignment of land by
the government reaffirmed women’s subordinate position. In 1885 and 1889 regulations
were imposed stating that unmarried women were not entitled to purchase land.* An
overview of requests by unmarried women reveals that they were denied land for building
homes based on the argument that they lived with their parents and were therefore not in
need of their own home. For example, two women, Plantin and Selina, both unmarried
and without children, were denied the two acres of land each had requested. The reason
given for this was that the land was too large for single women. These plots were reserved
for men with large families.’
     This indicates that the State also cultivated the idea that decent women should remain
under the control of their parents until they married. Nevertheless, married women were
also denied land as such requests could only be carried out by their husbands. Some
women refused to accept this and repeatedly applied for land.” Yet their position was
increasingly undermined due to the State institutionalizing the male as head of the family
and the Church preaching this middle class value as necessary for building a new
Curagaoan society.
     The following story expresses a cultural assumption of how women should behave in a
relationship with a man. In this story the relationship is treated metaphorically with animal
figures as protagonists. It is to be noted that it was remembered by a female informant.


                                                                                         ZW
Warawara tin masha rabia riba galina, paso          Warawara    (crested caracara) hates chickens,
galina a nek e. E tabata kasá ku galina. Awó        because he was cheated by one of them. He was
galina tabata hasi su trabounan mashá bon,          married to a hen. Atfirst the hen used to do her
ma despues a drent’é un mal ehèmpel. A bin          work very well, but suddenly she became lazy
bira ku e no ta hasi trabou di kas mas. Tur dia     and stopped doing her house chores. Every day
tin balia na kas di Koma kalakuna. E ta bai         there was a dancing party at the home of Mrs.
balia. Ore bini su kurpa ta kansá, e no por hast    Turkey. She used to go dancing there. When she
trabou. E ora ei warawara ta haria duele, pasó e    returns home, she is so tired that she cannot do
ta bisa warawara ku e tin doló di kabes, en’ por    any chores. Warawara pitied her, as she used to
a hasi trabou. Warawara pober ta bint, e mes ta     tell him that she had a headache, and she had
kushiná. Awor kompa chuchubi ta su amigu.           not been able to do any work. Poor warawara,
Kompa chuchubi a mira e kos et, e di: Awèl mi       he himself had to cook. Now chuchubi is the
tin ku bisa kompa warawara e kos ei.” Awor un       friend of warawara and he saw what was hap-
dia, nèt ora kompa warawara ta den kunuku ta        pening. He said: ‘T have to tell mr. warawara
chapi, kompa chuchubi a para riba un palu           about this. Now one day when warawara was
anto el a kanta: ‘Kompa warawara,       bo di bo    hoeing his land, chuchubi went on top of a tree
senora tin doló di kabes, pero bai kas di koma      and said: ‘Kompa‘ warawara, you say that your
kalakuna bai mira kiko e ta hasi aya.               wife has a headache, but go and look at the
Warawara a skucha anto e di: ‘No, ta kiko esei?’    home of Mrs. Turkey and you will see what is
El a keda studia un ratu. Despues el a benta su     happening. Warawara listened and said: ‘No,
chapi abou, el a disidi di bai kas. Ora el a yega   what are you talking about?’ He contemplated
kas e no a hana koma galina den kas. Buska          for a while. Afterwards he threw down his hoe
buska tur kaminda, el a disidi di bai kas di        and decided to go home. When he arrived
koma kalakuna. Ora el a yega ayá, ai el a bin       home, he did not find his wife, Mrs. Hen there.
haria koma galina no, mort’ fuma den brasa di       He looked everywhere. He then decided to go to
un kalakuna-gai ta balia, ta benta garganta         Mrs. Turkey’s house. When he arrived there, he
atras, bon bisti, tur na sinta. El a para wak nan   found Mrs. Hen as drunk as a    fiddler, dancing
bon, el a bini kas. Asina koma galina a drenta,      in the arms of a young turkey. She was nicely
el a duna koma galina un bon hala di sota...         dressed with all types of ribbons and kept
Koma galina a keda tur kèns bentá abou. El a         throwing her head backwards. He stood there
hana asina un rabia, ku el a kom’é. Wèl for di e     and watched, then he went home and waited.
dia ei, warawara no por a mira galifia mas.         As soon as Mrs. Hen entered he gave her a good
Unda ku e mira un galina e ta kom’é, asina           beating. Mrs. Hen remained on thefloor out of
tantu rabia el a hana riba galina. I asina tambe     her senses. He hated her so intensely, that he ate
e kuenta a kaba.’                                    her. Well, as from that day, he could not see a
                                                     chicken anymore. Wherever he saw a chicken
                                                     he had to eat it. That much he had hated Mrs.
                                                     Hen. And that is the end of this story.

A woman was judged within society by the ways she was able to satisfy the basic needs of
her husband. In the following narrative the woman again failed to accomplish this, and
even though her motive was of a religious nature, it was condemned.


Un dia un homber a bini kas, e no a hana su         One day a man came home and did not find his
kuminda. E muhé ta gusta su rosario i su misa.      food ready. His wife liked to pray the rosary and
Ma e homber si no ta gusta su misa. E ke hafia      attend Church. But the man did not like to go to
su kuminda kome. El a yega kas un dia, e no a       Church. He wanted to have his food ready when
hafia su kuminda, el a bati e muhé. E muhé a        he came home. Once he came home and did not


218
 kore bai mondi. Un mondi grandi masha será”    find his food ready, he beat his wife. His wife
                                                ran inside the wood, a very dense wood.

Both stories demonstrate what kind of behaviour was expected of a female. They also
address the punishment for female misbehaviour: the men resort to domestic violence.
Following emancipation, women were likely to be subjected to violence by their husband
or by the man they were cohabiting with. Court records show that ill-treatment of female
partners or wives was deemed unacceptable." In these cases men would usually state their
motives for this ill-treatment, thus indirectly giving an insight into what expectations they
had of women. There is, for example, the court case of Simon, who kicked to death the
 three year old daughter of Maria Louisa, with whom he cohabited on plantation Asiento.
 Simon continually ill-treated Maria Louisa and on that particular day had become very
 angry because his dinner was not prepared when he arrived home from town.”
      Sometimes women could not accept this victimization and sought help through the
 courts. For example, Zoila, a 19 year old straw hat maker cohabiting with a man named
 Ilario, took him to court after he had badly beaten her when she complained about his late
 return from a dance.” Most of these court cases dealt with women living in town. Virtual-
 ly no records were found relating to domestic violence in the kunuku. There, the matter
 was likely to be settled within the community, by someone with authority. The priest Bren-
 neker was informed by a lady born in 1868 that her father had told her about a place on
 the plantation of San Juan which had come to be known as Ninga Mari (Refused partner)
based on the fact that a man called Buchi Wan used to ill-treat his ‘woman’ at that place.
 Members of the community chased him away, denying him further access.”
     It was very important for a woman to uphold an image of respectability. Court records
show that some women would use the courts when they felt they were dishonoured ver-
bally. These cases were mostly the result of quarrels, where a woman would be slandered
about her alleged sexual behaviour. A woman named Helena, for example, requested the
district master to forbid a man visiting her home as he was spreading the rumour that he
had had intercourse with her. Despite this prohibition he did visit her, entering her home
and sitting in her chair. When she tried to get him to leave, he called her a whore and
claimed that he had had sex with her and also wanted to beat her. The next day he repeat-
ed this from the hill top in the neighbourhood and the next Sunday again in front of the
church." Inevitably, these public slanders would taint the respectability of a woman.
     Another case was that of Isabelita who took Rudolph to court, a man spreading a slan-
derous rumour claiming that he had had the opportunity to have sex with her, but had
declined this to have sex with her sister instead.” In 1907 a woman named Mathilda took
another woman, named Claricienne, to court, as she had slandered her by calling her a
whore and accusing her of ‘pretending to be a fine lady, when in fact she was cohabiting
with a man by the name of Winkel’."° By mentioning the man’s name the slanderer claimed
to have some knowledge of the behaviour of the woman. In this case the name would indi-
cate that he was a member of the higher class.
     It was not only women taking men to court. A certain Wim took Carmelita to court
after she had told him not to bother with her affairs but to concern himself with his wife’s
instead, who she claimed was committing adultery with a certain Juan, son of Djina.”


                                                                                           219
Again the name of the person is mentioned. In a case where a woman was accused of theft,
she was also labelled a whore." These cases reveal people’s perceptions of respectability. For
a woman this revolved around her sexuality: retaining her virginity or remaining faithful.
     Songs were also important as a medium for questioning respectability. For example,
songs dealing with extramarital relations placed much emphasis on the respectability of
the woman. The wife and the lover of a man are each other’s kombles (rival). This is man-
ifest in the following song, where the wife labels her rival ‘kombles’”, thus categorizing
her as a promiscuous woman and comparing her with a woman of the street (a whore).
The singer stresses the lack of her rights as opposed to a married woman.

Ajera ma mira mi kombles                        Yesterday, I saw my kombles
E ta bin ta tira puna pa mi                     She came and threw words at me
e ta bini largami sabi                          asking me how Ifeel now
ta kom mi ta sintimi awor                       that my man has left me
ku dalia a bai largamt                          I gave her no answer
ningun contesta mi no a dune                    my dog wanted to answer
mi kacho ke responde                            I told it to leave the street
mi di kune larga e sol ladra kaya               barking only to my kombles
pasobra e ku kaya ta igual                      because she and the street are one of a kind
Mi kacho ta mihor kune                          my dog is better off than she is
pasombra e tin derechi, e tin bancht.”          because it has rights, it has a penning.


The following song relates to a woman’s extramarital relations. It concerns a woman called
Chikita who lived together with a man named Djodjo, but rumour suggested she had a child
with the overseer. Once again, the woman is portrayed as someone behaving immorally.

N'yèyèyè, n'yèyè,                               N'yèyèyè, n'yèyè,
Ta yu di bomba ku Djodjo.                       It is the child of the overseer and Djodjo
Parandero Ye.                                   Revellers Ye.
Chikita, ata yu ta yora                         Chikita, the child is crying
Parandero Ye                                    Revellers Yè
Ta yu di bomba ku Djodjo                        It is the child of the overseer and Djodjo
Ta yu di bomba ku Djodjo.                       Tt is the child of the overseer and Djodjo
Parandero Ye.”                                  Revellers Ye.


As an alternative to court action, tambu songs were composed by women themselves in an
attempt to salvage their respectability. For example, in the following tambú song, the
woman-singer recalls with regret that the affair ended with the man sending her back to
her mother when she became pregnant. In these songs relating to sexual conduct,
metaphors were used. The male informant who sung it to me believed it to be a true story
which he had heard during a tambú celebration on the plantation in Banda Bou where he
lived at the beginning of the twentieth century.” By singing it in public and communally,
the woman gave her own side of the story, in doing so curtailing the gossip and the
rumours stemming from this event.” It could also be a way of warning other women about


220
the dangers of illicit sexual relationships, including ruining any marriage prospects, thus
indirectly sustaining the Catholic clergy’s concept of bida drechi. This coincides with the
proverb ‘Un homber ta kai den lodo, lanta sagudi su kurpa, e ta keda homber’ (A man
would fall in the mud, would stand up, shake his body and will still remain a respectable
man)” Although women had no such luxury, they would express themselves in order to
draw attention to their particular situation.
    Three variants have been found of this song, thus revealing a recurrence of this type of
relationship, in which women experienced a form of exploitation by men.


Tur hende a papia un ko’                        Everybody said something
Ta kon mi so w papia nada?                      Why did I not say anything?
Paso m’a hasi un negoshi                        I did a business
ma e negoshi w kumbinimi                        but the business was inconvenient
M’a hasi negoshi                                I did a business
Ma negoshi a sali malu                          But the business went bad
M’a kumpra un bari di suku pretu                I bought a barrel of brown sugar
M’a bende, m'a pèrdè ariba                      I sold it at a loss
Shonnan, el a pidimi rosa mondi                 People, he asked me to clear the land for sowing
El a pidimi kima sushi                          He asked me to burn the trash
Awó ku boshi ta na ranka                        Now that there is a fruit on the vine
el a mandamipa mi mama.”                        He sent me to my mother.


The following variant of the same song collected by Brenneker and Juliana expresses anger
about the situation and in this case is more direct in accusing the male. Again the singer
improvises her anger to the inspiration of the moment, using the well-tried motif of the
tambu.


Zimulat, Zimulai,                              Forgiveness, forgiveness27
Zimulai na de dòndru                           Forgiveness to hell
Ku mi sambarku di shete stribu                 With my seven strapped sandals
ma yudabo, traha kunuku                        I helped you to farm
Awó ku pampuna ta na ranka                     Now that there is a pumpkin on the vine
b’a mandamipa mi mama                          you have sent me to my mother
Zimulai, Zimulai,                              Forgiveness, forgiveness
Zimulai na de dondru.”                         Forgiveness to hell.


The third variant using a rhythm was carried back by labourers returning from Cuba and
also focuses on this theme:

M’a yudabo rosa mondi                          I helped you clear the land for sowing,
kibra sumpina den mi dede                      had cactus thorns pierce my fingers
p'awe ku pampuna ta na ranka                   and now there’s a pumpkin on the vine
bo mandami pa mi mama...                       you sent me to my mother...
Tu kabritu keje keje,                          Keje keje goat that you are,



                                                                                            2D
kon binibo na baranka?                          how come you took to the rocks?
Tu kabritu keje keje,                           keje keje goat that you are,
kon binibo na baranka?*                         how come you took to the rocks?


As previously stated, according to Wilson, respectability is exemplified by the middle class
on the island and also by women of all social classes, who are notably more devout than
men (1973:102). For the male culture he used the concept of ‘reputation’ a clear distinc-
tion from the way women were judged. According to Wilson men mostly hang out on the
street, its adjunct. They would gather at the rum shop at every opportunity to drink, play
games and above all talk (1973:149-50). This notion is applicable to Curagaoan male soci-
ety as well. The Church often complained that it was only marginally successful in imbu-
ing a moral code in Afro-Curagaoan males and that their manners were less attuned to the
Roman Catholic values. Popularly such a man was called mucha homber parandero: a ‘rev-
eller’, unwilling to settle down.
     The following tambt song — which I collected from a male informant — seems to com-
ply with this. The main character reassures his mother that she should not be afraid to lose
him as a consequence of marriage. He likens himself with a cockroach who knows how to
fool a hen. Here an element of play and trickery is also present. The song portrays the rela-
tionship between a mother and her son. The same woman who has been protective of her
daughter, allows her son a lot more freedom. She expects her daughter to marry, but her
son, who would support the family financially, she would rather hold on to.

Hendenan tur yega serka                         People come and draw close
Mi ta bai kontabu mi pasashi                    I am going to tell you my story
ma kaweta ta na porta                           But gossip is at the door
i ta bai bisa ku tami di                        And will say that I have said
Ai mama, mir’é ta yora                          Oh mother, look at her crying
ku e ta bai pèrdè su yu baron                   Because she is going to lose her son
Mama, bo no yora                                Mama, don’t you cry
tami ta e kakalaka                              I am the cockroach
ku ta dual galina bula bai.”                    to fool the hens and fly away.


This song coincides with the following extract from a narrative recorded by Juliana, in
which a man named Carlitu Martina, born in 1905, discusses fishing at sea off the north-
ern coast of the island. He compared the sea there, with its almost constant heavy waves,
to a man who on seeing a woman becomes very agitated. In this sence the sea represents
manhood and therefore strength and power.

C.M.: Laman di nòrt no por mira muhé ku         C.M.: The sea at the northern part of the island
wowo.                                           cannot stand the sight of women.
E.J.: Ta bérdat e kos ei?                       E.J.: Is that true?
C.M.: Si. E no por mira muhé ku wowo,      ta   C.M.: Yes. It cannot stand the sight ofwomen. It
laman machu esei.                               is a male sea.
E.J.: E no por mira muhé.”                      E.J.: It cannot stand the sight of women.


222
People had a conception of what represented a good man: someone who provided for his
woman and children. He had to be a homber trahadó, a hard-working man. Elsio Solassa,
for example, refers to the expectations of his mother’s family with regard to any prospec-
tive husband: ‘E mester ta hende serio, i e mester ta trahadó tambe, paso ora bo kasa bo tin
ku traha’ (The man had to be a serious person and a hard-working man, because when you
get married you have to work)” Another example is the following saying, which reinforces
the expectation that good men earn money: ‘Loke un bon hòmber ta trese na kas ku man,
tin muhé ta tira afó ku kuchara’ (A spendthrift woman will squander what a good man has
earned).” One of the questions the girl’s family would ask a man wanting to propose was
whether he had been able to build his own hut, since this was also an indication of whether
he could provide for a woman. Following are some of the additional questions asked when
someone proposed, told by Rosa Isabela, born in 1900.

Buchi Jobe a bai puntra pa kasa ku Katrina.         Buchi Jobe came to propose marriage to Katrina.
Buchi Jobe a kana yega na kas di mama di Kat-       He walked and reached the home of the mother
rina. E ta bisa: ‘Kon bai Ma?’ E mama ta            of Katrina. He said: ‘How are you, Ma?’ The
respondé: ‘Kon bai Buchi Jobe. Buchi Jobe, no ta    mother answered: ‘How are you, Buchi Jobe? Do
drenta?’ ‘Si, Ma.’ ‘Kiko ta Buchi Jobe su respon-   you want to come inside the house?’ ‘Yes, Ma.’
di’ ‘Ma, mi a bin puntra Ma pa Katrina,              ‘What did you come for, Buchi Jobe?’ ‘I came to
‘Bucht Jobe tur kos ta kla” ‘Si Ma, mi tin un       ask Ma's permission to marry Katrina. “Buchi
mangasina yen di maishi chiki. Anto mi tin seis     Jobe, do you have everything ready in place?’
galina rondo di kas. Anto Ma, mi tin buriku          ‘Yes, Ma. My storehouse is full of millet. And I
machu mará na palu. Anto mi tin kalbas, ku ta       have six hens walking in my yard. I also have a
karga dies dos kana di mangusá, pa hende di         male donkey tied to a tree. And I have some cal-
trabou tempu di kunuku.’ “Buchi Jobe, Bo tin        abashes which can carry twelve litres of mangusa
karson pa bai afo. ‘Si. Mi tin dos karson pa bai    (food made of millet, beans and peanuts), for
afó. Un di nan Katrina mester lapi.”’               when the people come to help to harvest.’ ‘Buchi
                                                    Jobe, do you have pants to wear for travelling?’
                                                    ‘Yes, I have two pairs ofpants to wear for travel-
                                                    ling. One pair needs to be mended by Katrina,’


Also a man with whom one was cohabiting, was judged against these expectations. For
example, when Johannes was stabbed to death by a 35 year old former slave called Cheva-
lier on Christmas Eve 1877, Petronia, with whom the deceased had a visiting relationship,
lamented the fact now the man who took good care of her and her children, was dead.”



Poverty and its Impact on the Bida Drechi
Poverty was an ever present constraint on family life. After emancipation, the socio-eco-
nomic situation for a large group of Afro-Curagaoans was very bad, with many living in
extreme poverty. Crops often failed for several consecutive years, resulting in people hav-
ing next to nothing to eat (Renkema 1981a). Each year the colonial report would record
rainfall patterns. It also reported whether there were other types of livelihood available and
would give an overview of these.


                                                                                                 223
In many court cases hunger was given as a motive for stealing food or breaking the rules
with respect to the amount of produce transported and the required permit. These court
cases would increase in a drought year — a bad year, mal afia — resulting in no harvest at all.
Children would then stay home from school, or receive biscuits at school. Family members
would even fight over food.” The newspaper La Union of 13 April 1889 wrote that pover-
ty had increased and that there was a lack of work; even begging had become difficult. Beg-
ging was a common feature in the life of Afro-Curagaoans, as expressed in the proverb
‘Kaminda buriku trapa, totolika ta bebe awa (Where the donkey steps, the bird totolika will
drink water, in other words: poor people must receive from the rich). On 11 February 1903
La Cruz described how poor people would go and collect the bread that the warships had
thrown into the sea and would let these pieces dry so that they could eat them. In the same
year the district master wrote that he saw people, formerly in a good position, starving,
with nothing but herbal tea to drink”
     Popularly these years were called ‘afia di tene muraya’ (the year(s) to hold the wall(s),
due to people becoming so weak that they needed to lean on the walls while walking).
Poverty meant being unable to pay the land rent (resulting in requests for dispensation
from the government) and a lack of food, water and proper clothing, which especially
affected children.” Hunger was referred to euphemistically as ‘awe krus ta abou’ (today the
cross is down) or ‘Wancitu a subi mesa’ (Juancito has climbed on the table). Nevertheless,
starvation was a common reason cited for stealing. For example, Hose, a former slave who
in 1879 was 66 years old, received five years imprisonment for stealing a sheep. His argu-
ment was that he had become too weak to work and that the money he earned was not suf-
ficient to live on.” An extreme example of poverty was the case of a twenty year old female
straw hat maker who in 1874 tried to kill her child by pushing a stone down its throat. The
mother cited destitution as the main provocation for her action.”
     People would sometimes resign themselves to poverty with certain expressions, such
as: ‘Nos t’ei na mundu pa biba kontentu pasó hende mester biba kontentu, sea barika yen,
barika bashi, kontentu ta spar bo’ (We are in this world to live happily. Because people have
to live happily, whether you are sated with food, or have an empty stomach. Happiness will
save your life)” The agony of hunger was expressed in all forms of oral tradition. Many
stories and songs concerning poverty focus in particular on its effect on family life. For
example, food was a recurring theme in many Nanzi stories. The trickster Nanzi would
steal food from shon Arei, who had an abundant supply. The rationale for his action was
that his wife Shi Maria and their children were starving. In the stories, however, Nanzi did
not always share the food with his family and sometimes behaved irresponsibly. This was
not approved of.
    In most stories and songs concerning hunger, children were the focus, being the most
vulnerable. The aforementioned Boeke described how the bellies of young children would
be swollen due to hunger while their bodies remained very thin (1907:52). Dekker’s study
(1982) revealed a high incidence of child mortality before the age of one.
    The following song related to me in 1984 by an 84 year old interviewee who had learnt
it from his father, focuses on the plight of a starving family, a father and mother with four
children. There is no work. One of the children sings in a child-like way and states that he
is hungry. He tells his father and mother that he has pain in his belly. They have nothing


224
to feed him and the child gets angry and throws his plate on the floor. The plate falls and
makes the sound vayo plinin. One of the greatest challenges of family life was to feed one’s
children.

Amz tin djolo, bayayo                              I have pain, bayayo"
Ami tin djo vayo plinin                            I have pain, vayo plinin
Pega kandela djolo                                 Put on the fire, pain
Vayo plinin                                        Vayo plinin
Zea nun de, vayo plinin.*                          Zea nun de, vayo plinin®


The same motive is present in the following story. Again it presents a recurring challenge:
how can the family survive in the face of these economic difficulties? Here it is apparent
that poverty also impedes children’s education. The story revolves around whether the
child can attend school while being hungry.

Un dia tabatin un mama i su kasd. Un yu so          Once upon a time there was a mother and her
nan tabatin. Nan tabatin un bida mashá              husband. They had only one child. Their life
penoso ku otro. E tata ta bai mondi bai piki        together was very pitiful. The father would go to
palu seku, mara, bin kòrta bin bende na porta       the bushes to pick dry pieces of wood, tie them
di kas pa kuida kas. Nan ta sinta riba un piedra    together, then cut them and sell them in order to
o riba un bari, asina pober nan tabata. E           maintain his family. They were so poor, that
mucha a keda te na ora e mester a bai skol.         they had to sit on a stone or on a drum. Now it
Awor e tata ta desea pa e bai skol, ma e no tin     was time for the child to go to school. The father
moda pa e mucha bai skol. E mama di: ‘Laga         wanted him to go to school, but there was no
nos buska un manera pa e bai skol? E tata di:       money to send him. The mother said: ‘Let us
“Ta ki nos por hast... Anto no tin nada... Tin     find a way for him to go to school.” The father
mainta w tin ni kòfi ni te” E mama di: ‘Laga e     said: “What can we do... And there is nothing...
mucha bai skol den nomber di Dios.”                Sometimes in the morning there is neither cof-
                                                   fee nor tea.’ The mother said: ‘Let the child go to
                                                   school in the name of God.

The following statement given to Brenneker by a woman who had experienced this type of
hardship clarifies what it meant to live in poverty. It shows how creative a mother had to
be in order to feed her family. What is important in this statement is the informant’s idea
about marriage and her contribution to keeping the marriage together despite economic
difficulties.


Den mi bida di matrimonio... mi a tene mi          In my marriage..., I kept my marriage alive. I
 matrimonio. Mi a sòru pa mi lugá, manera          took care of my home, according to how the si-
 tempu tabata. Mi kasd tabata gana tres (énfa-     tuation was. My husband used to earn 1.65
sis) yotin ku un rid of ku dorid pa siman. Kada    guilder or 1.80 a week. Every one year and two
un afia i dos luna mi tabatin yu. Te mi a hana     months I gave birth to a child. I got 17 children.
17 yu. Mi a lucha ku matrimonio te ora ma          I struggled with my marriage and learned how
fustan kon tin di hasi ora bo ta den e bida ei.    to manage while in such a life. My husband
Kasá ta gana tres yotin ku dòriá pa siman. Ora     earned 1.80 a week. At the end of the week, he



                                                                                                 AS)
siman yega, e mester tuma un ria pa tabako.        would take 15 cents for tobacco. And there
Anto ta keda ku tres yotin ku un rid. Pastor, e    would remain 1.65 guilder. Pastor, you know,
sèn no ta yega pa kria kas yu, yu chiki den kas.   the money was not sufficient to keep a home,
Pastor, mi ta mara mi kabes, mi ta kue mi          take care of the children, small children. Pastor,
kaminda. Despues ku mi a bira brutu den e          I used to tie my head with a scarf and go. After-
bida, mi ta faha mi lomba, kue mondi. Buta         wards when I became hardened by life, Iwould
yunan den kas, duna nan kos, buta nan sinta        buckle up my back and set offfor the bushes of
riba stul, sera kas. Mi ta kue te mondi di         Papaya, south of Papaya hill. I would leave my
Papaya, na suit di seru di Papaya. Ora mi yega     children at home, give them some food, put
den mondi, mi ta kue shimaruku, yena maku-         them to sit on a chair and close the house. In the
tu, yena otro tas na mi man. Mi ta yega kas,       bushes I would pick shimaruku cherries and fill
traha papa pa mi yunan. Anto mi ta bai bisti       the basket and bag I carried. I would then go
mi pana i mi ta kue kaminda di bai Punda. Na       home, make some porridge for my children.
Punda mi ta bende shimaruku. Shimaruku aki,        Then I would get dressed and set off to town. In
shimaruku ayá, pa mi hana sèn pa kumpra            town I would sell the cherries. Walk and sell the
kuminda hiba kas. Mi so riba kaminda pa bai        cherries, so that I could get enough money to
kas. Banda di 8or di anochi mi ta na e luga ku     buy food and bring home. I would return home
yama Jandoret, banda di Sami. Ei mi ta para        all by myself. At 8 o'clock in the evening I would
mira mi kas si tin lus. Lugá no tin lus. Yega      reach the place called Jandoret, near Sami. I
hara mi yunan tur di kremp kremp banda di          would stand and look at my house to see if there
otro, huntu ku kasd, paso kasd no tin pa duna.     was any light. There would be no light. I would
Pastor sa ken a lucha ku bida di matrimonio?       reach home and find my children clutched to
Ta p'esei mi ta tur mankaron. di matrimonio?       each other, together with my husband. Because
Ta p'esei mi ta tur mankaron.”                     my husband did not have anything to give. Pas-
                                                   tor, you know who has struggled with marital
                                                   life? That is why I am all crippled now.




The Extended Family and Bida Drechi
Bolland (2002) states that following emancipation, many people in the Caribbean left the
plantations in order to reunite with family members they were separated from during sla-
very; this relocation often resulted in new communities being created. Studies have shown
that Afro-Caribbean families tend to be large and complex, with third and fourth genera-
tion family members playing important roles in the psychological and economic support
of the group (Bolland 2002; Barrow and Reddock 2002).
    During enslavement families of two or three generations were likely to be living on the
same plantation (Jordaan 1999:488). After emancipation, families residing on a piece of
land for a long period would often send a petition to the authorities, requesting a legaliza-
tion of their position. They would strengthen their claim by stating that the land on which
they had grown up had been handed down to them by their parents, who in turn had
received it from their parents.
    Even when people decided to leave the plantation where they lived — which often meant
leaving some family members behind — the main consideration in selecting a plot of
                                                                                         land
would be the proximity of other family members. For example, Mathias Apostel aban-
doned his plan to continue looking for land after the district master told him
                                                                               that he could


226
only get a plot far from the plantation where his family still lived.” In another case Saxen,
a former slave who had been chased from the plantation where he stayed after emancipa-
tion, lodging with his mother and sister, went to live on a neighbouring plantation, where
his father, Bomba Nanja, was the overseer.” In order to accommodate his son, the overseer
had asked the district master for permission to chop wood in order to repair his huts,
claiming that he was building a kitchen and a storage room. The district master recorded
that Bomba Nanja was instead building a third hut for family members from a neigh-
bouring plantation.*
    Another example is Andries, who soon after emancipation broke his contract with the
plantation owner to go and live with his father Jose on his land. In this case both father and
son were punished as a deterrent to others.” These actions show that in one way or anoth-
er, family members helped each other in order to become truly free. For many years this
living pattern based on multigenerational family unions continued to exist in the kunuku.
Several groups of the same family would live close to each other, sometimes on the same
land, which had originally been given out to an ancestor. In the countryside one would
find a collection of mudstone houses built over the years, as the family expanded.
    Kinship was important as it determined one’s identity. People were sometimes referred
to by the name of their ancestors as well, long after these had died. For example, a man
would be known by the name Wan di defuntu Maria: Wan, the son of the late Maria. This
extended name was also used in official letters. Or sometimes one would even include
three generations, as in the case of Wan di Maria di Federica: Wan, the son of Maria,
daughter of Federica. The name could include male ancestors but this was less common.
    Women in particular instilled in their children the importance of family relationships
and passed on information about their relatives. In their stories they would remember
those who had preceded them, the avochi (the ancestors). An informant states how she
continued this tradition taught by her mother. In her account she also remarks that this
custom was disappearing in the twentieth century.

Mi mama tabata konta nos tur kos. Di nos           My mother used to tell us everything. About our
famianan leu, leu. Mi yunan ta hari mashá ora      very distant families. My children laugh at me,
mi buska pa sa famia di hende. Asina mi mama       when I try to find out about the families ofother
asifami.”                                          people. I have been taught this by my mother.


The emphasis on solid family relations is also found in the following narrative, in which a
father teaches his children how to stay together as a family:

Mi tata a bisa nos: ‘Mi yunan, boso ta krese. No   Our father has told us: ‘My children, you are
buska nunka plaka, pasó si bo buska plaka bo       growing up. Never seek money, because if you
ta pèrdè bida. Ma si bo buska hende lo bo tin      seek money, you will lose life. But if you seek
bida largu.’ Un tata tabatin shete yu. El a        people, you will have a long life. A father had
manda e yunan bai kòrta shete bara. Ora e          seven children and he sent them to cut wood
baranan a bini, e di ku un di e yunan: ‘Buta       and bring seven twigs. When they came with
nan huntu anto kibra nan. E yu a pone nan          the twigs, he told one of them: ‘Put them
huntu. E di: ‘Papa, mi no bo kibra nan. E tata     together and try to break them. The child put



                                                                                                227
di: ‘Los nan awor,      buta abou. E di: ‘Kibra         them together and said: ‘Papa, I cannot break
awor. E yu a kue nan unu unu, el a kibra nan.           them.’ Then the father said: ‘Separate them and
E tata di: ‘Awor si. Asina ta ku ora boso plama         put them on the floor. He continued: ‘Break
for di otro, ora bosonan n° ta uni ku otro mas,         them now, The child took the seven twigs, one
ta fásil pa boso kibra.”'                               by one and broke them. The father said: ‘Now
                                                        you can break them. You see, once you break the
                                                        bond of being united you can easily be broken.’


The complexity of kinship is best illustrated in the array of names denoting family mem-
bers, as highlighted in the following overview.

       Table 8.1 Family Organization by Name and Nature of Relationship (Based on Oral Interviews)



 Generation             Papiamentu                 Standard English                Nature of relationship
                                                   meaning                                                  |
  fourth ascending | tatarawela                    mother or father of             consanguinity
                                                   one’s great-grandparents
  third ascending       bisawela (wela grandi)   | (great-grandparents)            consanguinity
                                                   great-grandfather/mother
  second ascending | wela                          grandmother                      consanguinity




I
  Tawela                grandfather                consanguinity
  first ascending       mama                       mother                           consanguinity
                        mama di kriansa            foster mother                    marital, member of
                                                                                    a community
                        madrasa                    stepmother                       marital
                        tata                       father                           consanguinity
                        tata di kriansa
                        padraso
                        tanta di parti di mama
                        tio di parti di mama
                        tanta di parti di tata     aunt (on the father’s side)    | consanguinity
                        tio di parti di tata       uncle (on the father’s side)     consanguinity
                        aktu-primu                 second cousin                    consanguinity
                        suegru/suegu               mother/father in law
                        kuna                       sister/brother in law            marital
                        madrina/pepe               godmother                        ritual kinship
                        padrinu/padrino            godfather                        ritual kinship
                        padrinu tras di porta       godfather (in case of a         ritual kinship
                    —                               child born out of wedlock
                        yaya                        nanny; also an elderly          ritual kinship,
                                                    woman who carried the           social relationship
                                                    child at baptism



 228
                                             7
                       menchi                    a woman paid to breastfeed | member of a
                                                 someone else’s baby          community/labour
  ego’s                ruman                     brother/sister                  consanguinity
                       primu                     cousin                          consanguinity
                       primu-ruman               the children of two sisters     consanguinity
                                                 or two brothers are
                                                 ‘first cousins’
                       ruman djafó               brother/sister born             consanguinity
                                                 out of wedlock
                       ruman di kriansa          foster brother/sister           community,
                                                                                 consanguinity
                       ruman parti di tata       brother/sister on the           consanguinity
                                                 father’s side
                       ruman parti di mama       brother/sister on the           consanguinity
                                                 mother’s side
                       kasa                      wife/husband
                       biba/kompanero di bida |common law wife/husband
                       kombles                   rival of the wife               extramarital
                                                                                 relationship
                       ruman di lechi            boy/girl breastfed by           Work-relationship
                                                 the same woman
  first descending   | yu                        child                           consanguinity
                                                 child born in wedlock           consanguinity
                       yu di kriansa             foster child
                       entena                    son or daughter of one of | marital relationship
                                                 the persons forming a
                                                 couple, accepted as a fully
                                                 fledged child of that couple
                      yu djafó                   child born out of wedlock     | consanguinity
                       ihá                       godchild                        ritual kinship
 second descending| nietu/netu                   grandchild                      consanguinity
 third descending     nietu tuma nietu           grandchild in the third         consanguinity
                                                 generation
 fourth descending    kabai a skop e             grandchild in the fourth        consanguinity
                                                 generation



This overview indicates that in the extended family system descent can easily be traced
back to the third and fourth generations. There is a strong sense of consanguinity, espe-
cially on the mother’s side. In most cases these blood or birth relationships would be
referred to as famia yegá, the immediate family. But the distinction between the famia yegá
and the famia djaleu (the further family) was very subjective.



                                                                                                     229.
People were related by the usual blood and marital ties or in some cases also by extrama-
rital ties. In addition, rituals and work could determine relations. Blood relations were not
always solely the result of a conjugal relationship. A cohabiting couple’s offspring were also
included in the kinship system, as were the offspring of extramarital relationships. The
term yu djafé refers to a child born out of wedlock. In the female headed household with
sequential monogamous relationships the brothers and sisters were called ruman parti di
mama (brother or sister on the mother’s side). Sometimes cousins of the same generation
grew up as brothers and sisters. In this case they were called primu-ruman (cousin/sister-
brother).
    The prime value of family relationships lay in their capacity for support. Social prob-
lems in particular put in action the networks of interdependence within families. In many
cases relatives would turn to each other for help in childrearing, when for example a moth-
er had died during childbirth. The concept of kriansa manifested in the term mama di kri-
ansa (foster mother), yu di kriansa (foster child) and ruman di kriansa (foster brother/sis-
ter) reflects the role of care in this situation. Sometimes the yu di kriansa was taken care of
by women engaged in a same-sex relationship. Although this was an issue not much talked
about openly, it was mentioned as a state existing among both men and women. The kam-
brada, where women lived together, often occurred due to the gender imbalance in socie-
ty as men would emigrate in large numbers to look for work elsewhere or they would work
as sailors on ships. These cohabiting women would adopt children from people who were
unable to financially support their own children.
     The network of help also became apparent in caring for a sick or elderly family mem-
ber. It provided a shelter for those who had been given the ‘ora di porta’ by the plantation
owner or who had been chased away from the plantation. The extended family proved use-
ful and often provided help when necessary. Important events such as harvest, marriage,
birth, first communion and death were shared within these relationships.
     However, many people due to various reasons still found themselves outside these large
family communities. For instance, the master of the fifth district mentions the case of a
woman who had nobody to take care of her ill children.” There was also the case of a fam-
ily living in Santa Rosa: with the mother having fallen ill and the father being in prison,
there was no one to care for the children: five year old John and three year old Jozef, an
adopted orphan. The district master had to act as an intermediary placing these children
for a fee of two guilders and fifty cents per month with a midwife, who had been recom-
mended by the priest of Santa Rosa.”
    Another example was the case of Marcelina, who died in September 1908, leaving a
nine month old baby in the care of a distant family member who had taken care of the
child when the mother was ill and continued to do so for a few months after she had died.
When the woman needed to go to town to look for work, she could no longer care for the
child. Neither the sister of the deceased nor the grandfather could look after the child.
Finally the woman took the baby to the district master in the hope that he would find a
family willing to look after it”
    One of the customs in this context was that of ritual kinship, such as created at bap-
tism, first communion and marriage. At baptism the parents would chose as godparents
people who had attained a position of prominence and respect within the community.


230
This could be based on their level of education or their financial position. Baptismal god-
parents played an important role in the life of the child. They shared financial responsibi-
lity, as the godmother (madrina) had to provide for the layette (the garments for the baby),
while at the first communion she would also be responsible for the child’s outfit. The god-
father was expected to cover some of the expenses incurred at these ceremonies, which
were usually accompanied by exuberant celebrations; also he would give the godmother a
present. The madrina-ihda (godmother and godchild) relationship was very important, as
the godmother was considered a second mother to the child. She had to give her approval
to important life choices and in case of the mother’s death she became responsible for the
child. Godmothers in particular were chosen for their high moral standards.

Madrina 1 padrino ta skohé pa wela. Nan           The grandmother chose the godparents. They
mester ta hende di bon famia i ta biba un bida    had to be people ofa good family and had to live
drechi. E madrina mester ta ‘sefiorita. E no      a respectable life. The godmother had to be a
tabatin mag di tin yu ni ta bibá ku niun hende.   virgin. She must not have any child, nor be liv-
E mester tabata saká for di kas di su mayornan.   ing with anyone. She had to be taken from the
E padrino si por tabata un tiki mas bieu i por    house of her parents (by her prospective hus-
tabata un hende kasá kaba. Ta importante ku e     band). The godfather could be older and could
padrino tabatin un bon trabou. Esei ta pa kubri   be married. It was important that he had a
e gastunan di boutismo isigui duna e ihá rega-    good job. That is to cover the expenses of bap-
lo i sén. E madrina tambe mester a hana regalo    tism and to continue to give the godchild pres-
serka e padrino.”                                 ents and money. The godmother also had to
                                                  receive a present from him.

The terms commere/compere and commadre/compadre were used as terms of address for
the godmother and godfather at baptism. It imbued in them an important position in the
family system. The padrino and madrina di kasamentu (patron and matron of honour)
were assigned during the marriage in Church. They accompanied the married couple dur-
ing the Church service and the couple could turn to them in the event of marital problems.



Conclusion

In this Chapter I have described social relations within the private realm. I elaborated on
this by using the concept of ‘bida drechi’ introduced by the Catholic Church to pinpoint
what was seen as proper family life: a monogamous relationship between a man and a
woman sanctioned by civil but principally religious marriage. In the male-oriented ideol-
ogy of the Catholic Church the concept of ‘bida drechi’ upheld patriarchy as proper fami-
ly life and perpetuated gender inequality in the family. Women were considered unequal
to men as they had to maintain passive and reproductive roles within the family. They were
primarily seen as wives and mothers.
    In a sense people embraced this value system. Civil and religious marriage was consi-
dered respectable, unlike the common cohabiting practice of the ‘biba’ and the ‘kompana’.
When legal marriage was financially possible, it was celebrated and performed as a means
of gaining prestige. It was also an important determinant of what was seen as being a good


                                                                                              DD
Catholic and carried with it social advantages for the couple and for their future children,
who could attend Catholic schools. Children coming from ‘bon famia’ — a formally mar-
ried couple — were given preferential treatment by nuns and priests at school.
    The local male-dominated ideology is also evident in the male perception of the cor-
rect behaviour of women and determined the ways in which men behaved towards
women. Women were therefore doubly subjugated; first by the social system and, in fam-
ily life, by their own partner or husband.
     Yet poverty made it difficult for people to maintain the moral code of the bida drechi.
Due to poverty, people migrated within and beyond the shores of the island, which affect-
ed how well couples could and would live up to this model of family life. While the men
were absent, women could display their autonomous roles more clearly within the norms
of respectability set for married life.



Notes

1     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1890, Procesverbaal no. 32.
2     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1878, Procesverbaal no. 24.
3     Interview Helena Koeks (born 1903), Jeanne Henriquez/Allen, July 1992 (NatAr). Oral History
      Project in preparation of the documentary ‘Bosnan skondi (Hidden Voices), by Jeanne Hen-
      riquez and Rose Mary Allen, July 1992, Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology of the
      Netherlands Antilles and Centre for the Development of Women (SEDA).
4     NatAr,     Archief van het Gouvernement,   Ingekomen   stukken, 3e district, inv. no. 42, 18-1-
      1889/42.
5     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Administratie van Financiën, 1892, 31-12-1897/611, 524.
6     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Administratie van Financiën, 1892, 4-6-1895/59.
7     Interview Chita Martina (born 21-5-1911), Brenneker/Juliana, 29-7-1982 (T 82, Fundashon Bi-
      blioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
8     ‘Kompa’ is a common term for a very close male friend.
9     Interview Gerardo Rosario (born 1877, living in Banda Riba (Zikinzá-collection,    T 759 and T
      761, NatAr).
10 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1872, Procesverbaal no. 37, 30; Rol
   van Strafzaken 1881, Procesverbaal no. 13.
11 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1881, Procesverbaal no. 13.
12 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1871, Procesverbaal no. 12.
13 Story told by Virginia Meulens (born 1869; Zikinzá-collection, T 438, NatAr).
14 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken, Criminele en Correctionele Teregtzit-
      ting 10-11-1871, Procesverbaal no. 43.
15 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1907, Procesverbaal no. 69, 74.
16 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1907, Procesverbaal no. 10.
17 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1905, Procesverbaal no. 18.
18 See for example the court case in which Rosita was accused of calling Betsy in public (in front of
   her home) a stinking whore and a shameless thief because she had failed to make the brims for
   the straw hats on payment as they had agreed upon five days earlier, arguing that her child was
   ill. Rosita had asked Betsy to return her wooden crown, but she had failed to do so (NatAr,
   Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken, Criminele en Correctionele Teregtzitting
   1872, Procesverbaal no. 31).
19 The mistress of the husband.



232
20   Brenneker 1970:1804.
Dl   Sung by Michi Rosina, born 1926 (Zikinzá-collection, T 1022, NatAr).
22   The songs for women were categorized as follows: religion, children, love, satire and work. More-
     over, through lullabies (kantika pa hasi mucha drumi) mothers interacted with their babies.
     Other songs were sung communally, such as those forming part of storytelling and ring-game
     activities.
25 See also the story by Juliana about Anita, who lived in the town area (Monte Verde). In the year
   her daughter Rosa started cohabitting with a busdriver in Pietermaai she sang ‘shonnan, m’a
   perde mi rosa, yor’e’ (People I have lost my rose, help me cry). Juliana 1981:18.
24 Even animal calls could be interpreted as a sign that a woman was pregnant without being mar-
   ried. The typical scream of an owl, for example, warned a mother that her daughter was preg-
   nant (Brenneker 1966:23).
25 Interview Didi Sluis (born 1904), Allen/Ernest Gaari, 14-4-1984 (NatAr).
26 Interview Eligio Maduro (born 1886), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 1066,
   NatAr).
27 Zimalai is a Guene word, translated by Martinus as ‘forgiveness’ (1997:199).
28 Interview Gerardo Rosario (born 1877), Brenneker/Juliana, 1958 (Zikinzá-collection, T 318,
     NatAr).
29   Interview Nicolaas Petronia (born 1898), Allen, 9-6-1986 (NatAr).
30   Interview Carlitu Martina (born 1905), Brenneker/Juliana, 25-4-1984 (T 101, Fundashon Biblio-
     teka Públiko Kòrsou’).
31   Interview Elsio Solassa (born 1938), Allen, 15-3-2000 (NatAr). His grandmother, who was born
     in 1887, used to tell him many narratives.
Sy   Hendrikse-Rigaud 1994:248.
33   Interview Rosa Isabela (born 1900), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 579, NatAr).
34   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1878, Procesverbaal no. 24.
35   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5 district, inv. no. 127, 16-4-1867.
36   Idem, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e district, inv. no. 138, 31-7-1903/121.
ai   Kerstgeschenk 1883:215.
38   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1879, Procesverbaal no. 4. Hose had
     been allowed to remain on his former plantation to weave baskets which he sold to the owner.
ag   NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1874, Procesverbaal no. 2.
40   Interview Felix Martina (born 21-2-1894), Brenneker/Juliana, 28-3-1978 (T 62, Fundashon Bi-
   blioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
4] Unable to translate.
42 Interview Eduardo Tokaai (born 1899), Allen, 12-9-1984 (NatAr).
43 Unable to translate.
dl Interview Lodewijk Hooi (born 1879), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 470,
   NatAr).
45 Interview Nana Demalia (born 1873), Brenneker/Juliana, 1958 (Zikinzá-collection, T 473,
     NatAr).       :
46 nn               van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken, 2e district, inv. no. 132, 4-12-1874/49.
47 NA, Ministerie van Koloniën, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6740, 12-6-1865/337.
48 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no. 125, 23-5-1863/5, inv.
   no. 126, 9-6-1865/76 and inv. no. 127, 30-10-1866/164 ; NA, Ministerie van Koloniën, 1850-1900,
   inv. no. 6740, 12-6-1865/337.
49 NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. No. 127, 26-4-1866/45, zie
   ook NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no 127, 28-4-1866.
50 Interview Altagracia Regina(born 2-5-19 10), by Brenneker/Juliana, 6-6-1985 (T 110, Fundashon
   Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).                                        a
51 Interview  Maria  Pieters (born 1878), Brenneker/J uliana, 1958 (Zikinzá-col lection, T 516, NatAr).



                                                                                                   233
52    NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 5e district, inv. no. 125, 25=7- 8603/35:
53    Idem, inv. no. 131, 28-3-1869/35, 12.
54    Idem, inv. no. 164, 9-11-1908/348.
55    Interview Virginia Meulens (born 1869), Brenneker/Juliana,    1959 (Zikinza-collection, T 440,
      NatAr).




234
CHAPTER IX
Tambú di bida:
An Afro-Curacaoan Concept of Life



This Chapter examines Afro-Curagaoans’ spiritual outlook on life. I am particularly inter-
ested in how Afro-Curagaoans reflected on and conducted their lives in the context of the
material and social conditions as described in Chapters VII and VIII. Some studies have
approached this from the perspective of Afro-Curagaoans’ religiosity, within the context of
the meaning and value systems the Roman Catholic Church introduced into their lives.’
Most of these scholars have stated that the Church had power over Afro-Curagaoans and
that it determined how they conducted their lives.
     Here, however, I would like to examine their outlook on life not only as a response to
Roman Catholic beliefs and practices — and in that way as an acculturated form of Roman
Catholicism — but also as a way which gives credence to their own values and moral code.
Barbara Kopytoff argues that people who have been converted to other religions retain
something of their traditional beliefs and combine these in various ways with the new
vision of the world they are offered (1987:463). Indeed, the Afro-Curagaoan outlook on
life has also been influenced by their own or their ancestors’ experience of being enslaved.
    I use the term tambu di bida, which Brenneker and Juliana recorded during an inter-
view with Felix Martina.” He used this concept as a metaphor for life similar in essence to
the saying ‘Manera tambt ta bai, sanka ta bai’ Literally: ‘that the buttocks go in the way the
drum beats’, thus representing flexibility. It is not surprising that the interviewee equated
the musical instrument of the tambú (drum) with life, since music played a primary role
in the lives of Afro-Curagaoans. But the word tambu has several additional meanings. It
referred to the most important instrument of the tambu celebration held in the months
around the end and the beginning of the year, as well as accompanying the kantika di
tambú.” The drum determined the rhythm of the dance and led the movements of the
dancers. By comparing life with a tambu performance the interviewee focused on the
necessity to be flexible in life.
    But tambú also meant perseverance, as it was one of the traditional African customs
able to persist despite the prohibition of this celebration (Rosalia 1997). During slavery the
practice was forbidden by the slave-owners, as they feared the propagation of dissent and
rebelliousness. It was also condemned by the Catholic clergy, who called the dance lasci-
vious and sexually immoral. Members of the older generation still relate the severe ways in
which the clergy punished those found participating in a tambu celebration. This punish-
ment included the confiscation of the drums, whipping and even the expulsion of those
participating from the Catholic Church.


                                                                                          235
René Rosalia, who studied the tambú and listed its different functions, considered it a way
through which the lower class undermined the rules of those with political and economic
power (1997:91-110). For him the tambú was an expression of subaltern resistance to class
and racial values in society. Rosalia described the tambú as a way of life in which the
enslaved — and following emancipation the workers and farm labourers — expressed their
spiritual beliefs. He compared it with other manifestations in the Caribbean, such as the
calinda of Trinidad, the winti of Suriname, the palo monte of Cuba and the candomblé and
macumba of Brazil (2002:1).
     But tambú was more than a form of resistance against the control of the dominating
class. In a male-female relationship it was also an expression of female power. For women,
participating in the tambu meant contravening what was deemed respectable behaviour,
since a respectable life would have held them hidden in the privacy of their own homes.
No ‘respectable’ woman would be expected to participate in the tambu and those who did
— either by organizing it, singing, clapping their hands, dancing or merely as onlookers —
were condemned and labelled bad women         (Witteveen 1992:107-17). Women       who per-
formed as tambu singers (kantadó di tambú) moved in the public domain and went
beyond the boundaries set by male-dominated society. They showed assertiveness and
courage in the composition and presentation of their songs. As singers they had the abili-
ty to introduce lyrics with which they could verbally whip people.
    In general, the tambú songs are characterized by the use of cunning word-play and
double entendre. The lyrics were carefully thought out in order to trigger the desired
response from the singers, dancers, drummers and onlookers. They commented on events
that had happened during the year and which were generally disapproved of. They also
referred to individuals, either from within or outside the community, who had misbehaved
during the year.’
    The tambu strengthened social cohesion among Afro-Curagaoans of the lower class.
They would gather in the yard of a house or in a public area to perform the tambu. How-
ever, some members of the white elite also participated in these celebrations, much to the
disgust of the State and the Roman Catholic Church” One of these was known as the
tambu di senorita (tambu of virgins), which Rosalia described in his thesis as a private
tambu celebration for rich merchants to which Afro-Curagaoan tambu players and young,
unmarried Afro-Curagaoan women were invited.® Furthermore, people of the elite class
would request tambú singers to improvise a song which insulted their rivals in tambú
form.’ It was also generally known that they would often conclude their home parties with
a tambú, while they were heavily intoxicated. The transcendence of social class barriers,
resulting in the participation of the white elite class in the tambu celebration, their use of
the tambu to transmit their own coded messages — even though it was surrounded by
much taboo and secrecy — shows that the tambu had become creolized in one form or
another. This attitude portrayed by the elite goes against Römer’s understanding of cre-
olization, which he sees as ‘the westernization of Africans’ and at the same time ‘a less-
desired Africanization of the white elite group’ (Römer 1993:20). Tambú was able to trans-
cend ethnic boundaries despite interference from those with power.
      This aspect of creolization has been insufficiently covered by Rosalia, who dealt with
the expression solely from the perspective of resistance. The notion of tambú as resistance


236
is contradicted when in the beginning of the twentieth century some plantation owners
began to allow the celebration on their land. This is said to have happened on the planta-
tions of San Juan and Savaneta (Rosalia 1997:137-9) and on Porto Mari (Allen 2001b:46).
Both the anthropologist Jennie Smith (2001:54-5) and Richard Burton (1997:264) confirm
that this phenomenon took place in the rest of the Caribbean. Smith studied these types
of expressions in Haiti, which were also forbidden by those with power. She states that this
music genre began to be accepted as the status quo, as those with power used it against
their opponents and it served to take people’s minds of their problems (2001:54-5).
     Considering all of these characteristics of the tambu, one should bear in mind the con-
cept of the tambu di bida when looking at how Afro-Curacaoans perceived themselves and
the reality in which they lived. “Tambu di bide’ thus reflects several paradoxical character-
istics. On the one hand it meant coping with destiny, whereby life’s events were seen as
inescapable and irrevocable, while on the other hand it also meant people performing as
active agents, taking control of their own lives. Yet they were only able to perform within
the social context allowed by the dominant class. This supports the idea of a double-edged
Afro-Caribbean culture, whereby opposition to dominance and living in freedom can only
occur within the social parameters and boundaries set by those dominating (Burton
1997). This leads to a paradox of accepting life as an inescapable series of events versus life
as a continuous challenge to come to grips with.



Afro-Curacaoan’s Cosmology
 I will start by looking at the notion of ‘tambú di bida’ within the context of what is called
 cosmology in anthropology. Joy Hendry defines cosmology as the ideas and explanations
 of people about the world they live in and their place in the world (1999:115). Their reflec-
tion about self and their place in life is expressed in religious thought. Most expressions
 attest God as the Supreme Being in life. Afro-Curacaoans referred to God as Dio’ or Djo,
derived from the concept Dios, the Christian name for God in Spanish. The terms Waze or
 Weze, meaning God in Guene, sound closer to African cultures. In some seú songs God was
also referred to by the name Shon Grandi (Upper Master), thus drawing parallels to the
power and authority of the slave-owner.’
      God was believed to control fate and his power was evident in all aspects of life, such
as the search for work, whether or not it would rain and the potential of a newly dug well.
God was especially referred to in relation to food and water, essential conditions not always
available to Curacaoans. Thus it was primarily in agriculture that God’s life-giving powers
were felt and recognized. The proverb ‘Si Dios ke e ta manda awaseru’ (Everything depends
on God’s blessing), for example, expresses this belief (Hendrikse-Rigaud 1994:161). It was
during agricultural work that Afro-Curagaoans made most of their songs referring to God.
     There were several agricultural rituals aimed at channeling divine power to attain a
good harvest. After the land had been cleared and prepared and before the planting would
start, a ritual would be performed asking God for permission to cultivate the land. This
was done by stamping one’s feet on the ground and by singing the following song, the
lyrics of which are partly in Guene and partly in Papiamentu. Over the years the meaning


                                                                                           297
of some of the words has been lost, making a direct translation impossible. However, it is
certain that it focuses on greeting the land before cultivating it.

Simudato lag’é                                Simudato lag’é
Ban kuminda tera awé                          Let us salute the land today
Kumindamentu pa tera awé                      Salutations to the land today
Simudato lag’é.’                              Simudato lag’é


After performing this ritual, the planting began. During the whole agricultural process the
protection of God was requested. At harvest time, some songs also referred to God’s
involvement and were an expression of gratitude.” During the first phase of planting
mainly spiritual songs were sung to greet God. The song ‘Shon Grandi a duna. Ta Tata di
shelu a duna’ (The Big Master has given. It is the Father in heaven who has given) was
usually sung at the opening of the harvest celebration."
    The following song was sung while picking the millet during the harvest ceremony, giv-
ing thanks to God for the harvest.

O, yama danki                                  O, give thanks
O, yama danki na Sefior                        O, give thanks to the Lord
O, yama danki                                  O, give thanks
O, yama danki                                  O, give thanks
Mi di,                                         I said,
yama danki na Senior.”                         give thanks to the Lord


In the following song God is again praised for his help in providing a good harvest. It also
focuses on reciprocal help and cooperation as essential aspects of harvesting.

Ai Djo ee, Limaninan                           Oh God, Limaninan
Bosonan tur bin kompandmi awe                  Come and accompany me today all of you
Awe mes Shon Dios a duna                       Today Master God has given
Mi bunitanan bosnan bin kompandmi              Nice people, come and accompany me
Awe mes, Shon Dios a duna                      Today Master God has given
Shon Dios a duna awe ee,                       Master God has given today,
Shon Dios a duna                               Master God has given
Awe mes, Shon Dios ta duna eee                 Today, Master God has given, eah
Limanaze, mira kon Shon Dios a duna nos        Limanaze, look how Master God has given us
Limanaze, Shon Dios a duna nos awe             Limanaze, Master God has given today
Mi Limananze, mira kon Shon Dios a duna.”      My Limanaze, look how Master God has given.

This reliance on God for a successful harvest must be acknowledged. It was a taboo not to
recognize his power. The following story shows what might happen if the taboo is broken.
Again God manifests his power in the natural world. In the Afro-Curagaoans’ religious
beliefs the physical world is animated and no distinction is made between animals and
human beings. In this particular case the dog assumes characteristics of a human being
and is able to communicate with people. But as it misuses this ability it is punished.


238
Dios Tata tabatin un kachó ku por a papia. A        God had a dog that could talk. Once God went
bin sosodé ku Tata ta sali bai keiru kuné, anto     to take a walk with his dog and they met a man
 tin un homber, ku ta traha su kunuku. Dios a       who was working on the land. God asked him:
mir’é 1 El a puntr’é: ‘Ki dia bo ta kaba e kunuku   ‘When will you finish your work on the land?
aki?’ E homber di: ‘Mafan. E no a bisa:             The man answered: “Tomorrow. He did not say:
‘Manan ku Dios ke. Dios no a gusta i El a bai.      ‘Tomorrow with God’s will.” God did not like
Ora nan a yega kas i e kachó a kere ku Tata ta      this and left. When they returned home and the
na sono, e ke men ku Tata no ta mir’é, — pero       dog thought that God was asleep and he
Tata ta mira nos ku un orea, i tende nos ku un      thought that God could not see him — but God
wowo — e kachó a kore yega serka e hòmber. El       sees us with one ear, and listens to us with one
a papia. E di kuné: ‘E homber, esun ku mi sa        eye — he ran to the man. He spoke and said to
kana kuné no, ta Dios. Ora e puntrabo ki dia e      him: ‘The man, the one I usually walk with, is
kunuku ta kaba, bo ta bis’é: Mafian, ku Dios        God. When He asks you when the work on the
ke.’ Ya Tata tabata sa kaba ku e kachó a bai        land will be finished, you must tell Him:
reda. E siguiente dia Tata a kumindá e homber:      Tomorrow, with God's will.’ But God already
 ‘Kon ta bai, bon homber, kon ta bai?’ E homber     knew that the dog had gone gossiping. The next
di: ‘Bon.’ Tata di kuné: ‘Ki dia e kunuku aki ta    day God asked the man: ‘How are you, my good
kaba?’ E di ku Tata: “Manian ku Dios ke. Tata a     man, how are you?’ He said: ‘Good. God asked
drei bisa e kachó: “Tende lo bo tende, mira lo bo   him then: ‘When will you finish working on
mira, ma papia si lo bo no papia. Ta p'esei         your land?’ The man      said: “Tomorrow,    with
kachó a keda ta hou, hou, keda hou, hou te datu     God's will.’ God then turned to his dog and said:
dia djawe.'*                                        ‘You will hear, you will see, but you will not be
                                                    able to talk. That is why until this very day dogs
                                                    can only say woof, woof, woof.


The following story which was transmitted by fishermen to the narrator is a reflection
about man’s place in nature. It again shows a flexible relationship between God, human
beings and nature, whereby the power of God is recognized as being all-pervading. It also
contains some terms in Guene, indicating African cultural connotations. In more specific
terms, this story tries to explain why the sea at the northern coast of Curacao, where fish-
ermen also throw their lines to fish, is so rough and needs to be respected. Indirectly the
story promotes the virtue of modesty, a value which is stressed in other forms. The over-
confident sea is put in its place by God.

Laman a puntra Dios si e por a lag’é buta un        The sea asked God if he could come ashore and
pia riba tera. Anto Dios di kuné: ‘No, si mi        God told him: ‘No, ifIgive you the possibility to
‘nabo un pia riba tera, bo ta kaba ku mundu na      place your feet on land, you will flood the
awa.’ Laman a rabia i el a kanta:                   world. The sea became angry and began to sing:

T’ami ta laman, eeeh                                Iam the sea, eah
Konalowé                                            Konalowé
Konalowé, Laman é                                   Konalowé, the sea, eah
Konalowé                                            Konalowé


Laman a rabia anto Dios a para ta mir’é.            The sea got angry and God stood there and
Laman a dal un saltu, spat den laria dos biaha.     looked at him and the sea jumped up, and



                                                                                                  259)
Ora su rabia a baha, Dios di kuné: ‘Bo tin ku         splashed twice. When he calmed down, God
wardami anto awor. Dios di kuné: ‘Mi por              told him: ‘You have to wait for me, now. God
dunabo un hende tur dia pa kuminda, pero si           told him: ‘I can give you everyday a human
mi ‘nabo un pia riba tera, bo ta kaba ku mundu        being as food, but if I allow you to set foot on
na awa. Anto e ora ei Dios a bis’é:                   land, you will flood the world. And then God
                                                      told him:

Akanasia makamba                                      Akanasia makamba
Awe ta mundu a tres’é                                 Today it is the world which brought him
Ke desir ta mundu a tres’é.                           Meaning that the world brought him.

Ta Dios a kanta e kantika ei. Anto Dios di kuné:      God sang the song. Then God said to him: ‘You
‘Bo ta mira e baranka aki? E baranka a lanta, el      see this rock? The rock was born and grew tall.’
a krese bira altu.’ Despues Dios di kuné: “Maske      Then God said to him: “No matter how high you
kon bo sapatiá, maske kon bo rabia, maske kon         jump, no matter how angry you get, no matter
bo bira, bo ta bin dal den e baranka aki bai          what you turn into, you will have to splash
laria, pasa djei mes subi.                            against this very rock, jump up high and from
                                                      there you will come ashore.
C.M.: Hahaha, pasó si Dios dunabo un pia riba         C.M.: Hahaha, because if God gives you the
tera bo ta kaba mundu na awa.”                        chance to come ashore, you will flood the world.



God’s presence was also recognized in social relationships. It was customary for people to
greet each other by saying Djidjo, a contraction of the words Dia pa Djo (Dios). Or one
might say Djidjo, mi ruman, Djidjo (The day is for God, my brother/sister, the day is for
God) (Juliana 1977a:221). Following this, one might inquire into the well-being of the per-
son’s family. Or they would greet each other by saying kuminda Weze or kuminda Waze,
terms greeting God. Upon leaving, reference would again be made to God: Te maftan ku
Dios ke (Till tomorrow with God’s will). This demonstration of religiosity in the use of
religious idiom for enhancing social relationships was also clear in the term Diosolopaga
(God will bless you), when thanking someone. All these expressions stem from the concept
of a Supreme Being determining everyone’s lives. This was also manifest when one made
plans for the future (“No por buta fiho’) without mentioning ‘with God’s will. The inter-
viewee Eduardo Tokaai explained this religious outlook, which he applied in daily life:

E.T.: P’esei nan ta bisa: ‘Te mafian ku Dios ke.      E.T.: That is why people would say: “Till tomor-
Asina nan ta bisa. Bo no por bisa ‘te maftan’. Bo     row with God's will. So they say. You must not
no tin ordu di bisa ‘te marian’. Bo mester bisa ‘te   say ‘till tomorrow’. You are not allowed to. You
manan ku Dios ke» Anto e ora ei Dios ta sa ku         must say: “Till tomorrow with God’s will.” Then
bo fe ta den Dios. Pasó’ si Dios n° ke, bo no por     God will know that you have faith in Him.
yega manan. Awor ta hende ku ta papia sin             Because if God doesn’t want to, you cannot see
pensa kon palabra mester ta. ‘Te mafian... ?          tomorrow. Nowadays people talk without
No, bo w’ sa. Bo por muri awé."®                      thinking how they have to say the words. ‘Till
                                                      tomorrow...°’ You don’t know. You may die
                                                      today.




240
 Artifacts were used to petition the help of the Supreme Being, thus revealing a synthesis
 with Roman Catholicism. For example, the rosario (rosary) was an important instrument
 for expressing religious belief. In 1856 a priest signalized that people wore rosaries around
 their necks as a sign of bearing the Catholic faith.” Besides as an instrument of prayer it
 was also used as a charm when placed around the neck. Some people used it for good
 health; in cases of illness it was used as a means to aid recovery. These artifacts were
 believed to be infused with a special force and in that way would help the wearer.
      Besides God, saints were believed to have power in determining one’s destiny. One could
 request their divine intervention in difficult situations. Haviser’s study (1987) based on the
 excavation of an Afro-Curacaoan dwelling house on plantation Knip uncovered various stat-
 ues which were used in homes, representing the cosmology of Afro-Curacaoans. The use of
 Catholic statues to evoke help again indicates a syncretism. Afro-Catholic religion centered
 on the worship of saints and rites conducted before altars at home." These saints could also
be portrayed in pictures which would be displayed in the homes. They were venerated in pri-
vacy at home or during ceremonies among a group of devotees.
     The principal saint at that time was San Antonio de Padua (San Antoni), celebrated on
the 13th of June.” In the celebrations in his honour, called the lele Tony, people would con-
gregate on nine consecutive days, the so-called novena, with the ceremony on the last day
being the most elaborate. At some of these ceremonies people would dance to the rhythm
of the drum in front of an altar upon which would be fruit, candles and rum. To this saint
they would make a request. People would ask for the good health of their loved ones.”
Single women turned to San Antonio when looking for a good husband, while married
women turned to him in order to secure a good marriage, fertility, as well as well-behaved
and healthy children. Farmers would petition for rain while fishermen would carry an
image of the saint in their pockets to ward off dangers at sea or to request a good catch. In
town, people would ask for money.
     People’s expectations of the saints were high and should they fail to meet their wishes
the saints were punished. For example, the model of the saint would be turned with his
back to the people, the little child he carried would be removed or he would be placed
upside down in water. This idea of punishing saints who did not grant people their
requests is also present in the history of western religiosity, as the Dutch anthropologist
Gerard Rooijakkers demonstrated in his study of rural people in seventeenth- and eight-
eenth-century Europe (1994:145).
     According to the anthropologist Richenel Ansano, these celebrations for the saints also
enforced group affinity. He was informed in an interview with Ciro Eleonora, a Curagaoan
key informant on culture, that during these celebrations there would be extensive donations
of food. Groups of people would put aside food in order to contribute to this feast for the
whole community (Ansano 1988:23; 1990:188-9). This indicates that these celebrations were
a way of meeting the practical needs of individuals. Food in this sense implied more than
physical nourishment; it was used to emphasize group formation (Wilk 1999:245).
    San Juan was venerated in an elaborate fashion on the 24th of June. On that day peo-
ple with a name derived from Juan were recognized. The rituals of this celebration were
accompanied by music and songs and focused on requesting rain to ensure a successful
harvest (Rosalia 1997:119). San Pedro was celebrated on the 29th of June to ensure the


                                                                                           241
well-being of fishermen. These rituals related to the satisfaction of people’s basic needs and
tell us what Afro-Curacaoans considered important in their lives.
     In addition to the Roman Catholic icons, the Afro-Curagaoans’ spiritual domain
encompassed a vast array of supernatural forces, including good and evil spirits relating to
the deceased. The evil spirits, named zumbi, were the souls of people who had lived a bad
life; their punishment was to dwell among the living and cause them harm.” They were
also called alma malu (bad soul) or spiritu malu (bad spirit). According to Brenneker they
were sometimes equated with the devil and were therefore also called djabel or satanas.
They were mostly active in the evening and rested at midday under the tamarind or in the
manzalifia tree (Hippomane mancinella)(Brenneker 1966:20, 32). People would draw
crosses on their fences, walls, trees and front doors in order to deter evil spirits (Latour
1949; Brenneker 1966:5). Sorcerers (hasidó di brua) could release these evil forces to harm
people (Latour 1948b:239).
      Spirit worship was sometimes conducted before altars-at home (Brenneker 1969:688-
91). According to van Meeteren, one of the first scholars to write on brua practices on
Curacao, brua was not always associated with evil. The hasido di brua could, for example,
also be a person with knowledge of medicinal herbs (1947:149). The priest Latour, by con-
trast, called brua practices Vudún, as these were commonly known in Haiti. In an article
‘Voodoo op Curacao’ (1949), he perceived these practices as superstition. According to him
they had not developed widely on the island, as the slaves had not been allowed to con-
gregate and due to the civilizing work done after emancipation by Dutch priests. In the
1960s Brenneker studied the phenomenon of brua together with Juliana, as a collective
term for sorcery, charlatanism, spiritualism, superstition and everything that goes beyond
the limits of the natural world (Brenneker 1966:1, 7).
    A rather neutral definition of brua is given by Ansano, who defines it (1988:9;
1990:174) in a more functionalist way, as an agglomeration of non-Christian spiritual
practices, similar to the obeah” of the British West Indies, including preparing and using
lucky charms, eliminating purported and declared enemies, healing physical illnesses and
social relationships, ensnaring spouses, divining, making amulets, possessing spirits and
consulting the dead. What he did not mention is that in addition brua can be used to
negate a curse, in a similar fashion as obeah (Simpson 1980:189). In most of these defini-
tions brua is described as something stemming from the mind of primitive people, with
the intention of causing harm to a third person. In my study on hasidó di brua I deduced
that brua worked on two levels, either doing harm or good, depending on the nature of the
request. Evil practices entailed the use of paraphernalia and rituals with the intention of
harming somebody. However, the same person might perform a service with good inten-
tions, such as curing someone.
    The presence of brua practitioners in Curacaoan society during slavery was studied by
Rutten (1989, 1999, 2003). Also following emancipation, some cases were identified which
can be linked to these practices. For example, part of a testimony in a court case of 14 May
1872 dealing with the theft of a baby vest, mentioned that a fifteen year old girl from town
had sent someone to buy oil for her lamp in order to see who had stolen her baby vest.”
This could be interpreted as a form of divination whereby the person through communi-
cating with the world of spirits tried to discover the identity of the thief. La Union of 15


242
May 1893 reported that during three consecutive days different houses had burned down
in Banda Bou and that people attributed this to the negative force of brua or sorcery.
Another example was a complaint made in 1911 to the district master in which a person
called Lica who lived in town was accused of practicing sorcery by Amanda and Devilla;
according to them she had swindled them of their money, thus also indicating a financial
aspect to brua practices.”
      In the same year the master of the third district, a rural area, had to take action when
a whole neighbourhood had carried a mature woman around in a hammock and physi-
cally abused her before returning her to her home in an unconscious state.” Malicious gos-
sip suggested that she was to blame for the disappearance of a certain 35 year old Victor,
who had left his home one evening never to return.” People believed that she could float
between heaven and earth and had evil powers. This type of action could be taken to fur-
ther extremes, as in the case of the assassination of Rosa on Bonaire, a Curacaoan woman
accused of being a sorcerer, a hasidó di brua. They found her corpse stabbed seven times
and her head crushed by a stone.”
      Orlando Patterson (1967:185) claims that people accused of witchcraft were often peo-
ple not abiding by the social norms and were therefore considered by the community to be
unsociable. Success and conspicuous happiness often engendered envy. This was also the
case for two women whose stories were carried on in the oral tradition and who lived in
the twentieth century. Juliana and Brenneker were able to collect the story of one of them,
Katalina Beleku, who lived in the eastern part of the island. Both women had their own
shops and were very enterprising (Clemencia 1996:83-91).* People attributed their success
to the fact that they danced with Almasola, an evil spirit who gave but demanded some-
thing in return. The other one was accused of being able to transform into an animal at
will.
    According to Brenneker (1969) and Ansano (1988) women in particular were believed
to form a pact with Almasola, who promised material prosperity (money, houses, land and
jewelry) in exchange for the sacrifice of human lives. As a symbol of this pact Almasola
would come every night to a specific place to dance with the woman. Ansano further states
that in the early part of the twentieth century the baile ku Almasola developed around the
city of Willemstad, lasting well into the 1960s (1988:4). Brenneker (1969:691) records that
in Banda Bou other women were believed to be dancing with Almasola, revealing a dis-
persion of the custom on the island.
    In his book Brua (1966) Brenneker gave an overview of several evil spirits who at the
time formed part of Afro-Curagaoan cosmology. The following Table is based on his col-
lection.




                                                                                          243
      Table 9.1 Names and Characteristics of Evil Spirits in the Nineteenth and the Beginning of the
      Twentieth Century on Curacao
      =
 No | Names                   | Characteristics
 1 | Almasola                  _ An evil spirit who promises material prosperity in exchange for
                                 human lives.
 zel Boli’ fuego                 A fireball which in the evening is carried in an open dish by a mother
                                as punishment for killing her child.
 3.       | Dambala             A powerful spirit.
 4 | Djanco                     The leader of evil spirits, who is seen principally during Lent.
E          Kabes di kadaver   | Synonym for Djanco.
 6 | Kumbu                      A luminous erring spirit.
En         Djengelé             A spirit.
| 8 | Dono di ca                A spirit who owns the graveyard. Also named San Elia.
 9         Gungu                 An erring spirit.
 l         Kofi                  A luminous erring spirit.
                                 A luminous erring spirit.
           Lenge                 Another term for Zeh.
 13 | Onzegbá                    Someone with the ability to become invisible, roaming and causing
                                 harm.
 14 | Zeh                        Someone who can remove a person's skin and fly through the air
                                 at night in search of a new born child from which it can suck blood.
                                 It was believed that by throwing salt on the skin of Zeh or èzè (or
                                 lèngèe) it would leave and never return.




The spirit Damballah was mentioned in a song by Damasio Hooi, born in 1887 without
legs and missing his right hand. The mention of the name Damballah shows that he had
some knowledge of the belief-system in Haiti, where Damballah (or Dambala Wèdo) was
an ancient snake deity predominantly present in the Vodún religion. In this song, Hooi,
alias Kokoti, tells Damballah that although he is a crippled goat, he knows how to get his
food on the mountain rock. It is uncertain whether Kokoti’s comparison of himself to a
goat stems from Damballah being a deity who likes goat meat.” If this is the case it also
indicates some knowledge of this religious practice.
     Another spirit that people appeared to use was the Dofio di santana or the San Elia,
who surrounded graves and graveyards. Latour (1949:239) in his review of The Virgin
Islands and their People (1944) by J. Antonio Jarvis — comparing certain rituals on the Afro-
Virgin Islanders to those of the Afro-Curagaoans — wrote that people would use human
bones taken from graveyards in their sorcery rituals. Simpson noted that this practice reoc-
curred in various places around the Caribbean and in Africa. He stated that in West-Africa
people threw a trail of grave around someone’s living space. Also in Trinidad grave dirt
would be used to harm people (1980:96). Religious paraphernalia associated with sorcery


244
and death were the four candles (bela di morto) which lit beside someone’s coffin had the
power to harm a chosen person (Brenneker 1966:5).
     Spirits were also present in the rituals surrounding rites of passage, in which people
moved from one life phase to another. At birth a child was believed to be very vulnerable,
so that certain rituals had to be performed to protect it from èzè or zeh (also called lenge).
It was thought that this spirit could remove the skin of babies and fly through the air. Dur-
ing the night it would suck the child’s blood. It was believed that by throwing salt on the
skin of ézé it would be banished. According to Brenneker, these beliefs and practices
occurred both in town and in the countryside. Here, the combination of Roman Catholi-
cism and other religious practices is evident. For the newly born needed to be christened
within eight days; until then it had to be protected from èzè. The ritual of wak ézé or wak
zè was a gathering of family, neighbours and friends for nine consecutive evenings after the
birth to guard the baby from this evil spirit.”
     This gathering was one of many securing reciprocity (Brenneker 1969:75; van
Meeteren 1947). This custom appears in most Caribbean societies and is known under the
name of Soukouyant in Dominica and French Guyana. The anthropologist Simpson, who
researched this phenomenon in West-Africa and the Caribbean, considers it a syncretism
of West-African and western beliefs. In West-Africa, Haiti, the Bahamas, the South Sea
Islands and some parts of the southern United States, Soukouyant was punished by sprin-
kling red pepper on the discarded skin (1980:98). The Lou-garo mentioned by Courlander,
similar to èzè, is also destroyed by sprinkling salt on its skin (1960:98).
    Spiritual customs surrounding death were highly revered. These included several non-
Catholic rituals and symbols employed by Afro-Curagaoans. Special rituals were enacted
in order to comfort the mourners and send the deceased to the afterworld. Here also the
interrelationship between Catholic faith and tradition is clear. When death was imminent,
a priest was called to administer the last rites. The death of a person would be signaled in
advance by means of death marks. These might for example take the form of a circular
bruise appearing on the body of a friend or family member of the person to die. This mark
would vanish after the person’s death. Other omens were taken from the natural world. For
example, the appearance of a black butterfly or an owl, flying either from east to west or
from west to east, a rooster crowing in the middle of the night and a dog barking at night.
    In the performance of these rituals, certain people assumed leadership roles, due to
their knowledge of traditional practices or their ability in other areas, for example by per-
forming as musicians, as singers in Guene, as curers of illnesses or as ‘hasid6 di brua. These
were people who in regular society did not hold any social position and who were usually
disparaged and dismissed but at certain times were able to perform as effective leaders
(Smith 2001:140).



The Search for the Self
The previous paragraphs addressed beliefs that Afro-Curagaoans had about the world they
lived in. In their cosmology, the figure of God played a predominant role with respect to
food, social relationships and destiny. In answering the question ‘Where did Afro-


                                                                                          245
Curacaoans perceive themselves to be in relation to this orientation to the world? I would
like to expand upon the concept of pekadó (man the sinner). This appears in many songs
and proverbs and seems to conceptualize the way Afro-Curagaoans positioned themselves
in the world. It is, for example, part of the following song praising God for providing a
good harvest. God, who intends the best for everyone, is opposed to humankind as a col-
lection of sinners.

Mira kon nos a biba na mundu                    Look at how we lived in this world
Ta nos mes ta malu na mundu                     It is we ourselves who are bad in this world
Pekadó di mundu, eeh                            Sinners of the world, eah
Ta nos mes ta malu na mundu                     It is we ourselves who are bad in this world
Mi pekadó di mundu, eh                         I sinner of the world, eah
Shon Dios tin tur kos pa nos                   Master God has everything  for us
Mira kon Shon Dios                              Look at how Master God
Tin tur kos pa nos.”                            has everything for us.


Another song containing the term pekado is Di ki manera, perceiving mankind’s well-being
as determined by others with power. The lyrics ‘If I behave well, the sinner finds that am
misbehaving, if I behave badly, sinners would talk scandal of me’, portray a feeling of hope-
lessness, because in whatever way one behaves, one is still judged negatively. As this was
said to be a slave song the underlying feeling of domination is evident. Different variants
from different informants across the island have been collected of this song. Juliana and
Brenneker collected six.” Rosalia (1997:17) and myself collected other variants, from
people born after emancipation.” This indicates that the song continued to be transmitted
to the younger generation, who applied it to help comprehend its own situation of domi-
nation.


Di ki manera                                    Tell me how
Di ki manera                                    Tell me how
nos ta biba we mundu aki,                       we are to live on this earth,
ora mi hasi bon,                                when I behave well,
pekado di ma hasi malu,                         sinners find that Iam misbehaving,
ora mi hasi malu,                               when I behave badly,
pekado ta marmorami.                            sinners would talk scandal of me.


My variant of the song resembles one collected by Brenneker and Juliana. This one was
sung by an informant born in the eastern part of the island. Rosalia’s variant specifies in
which areas of life the domination was more profoundly felt. It relates the difficulties
regarding land ownership and farming. The following stanza describes the feelings of
farmers when plantation owners would roam cattle over their land and let them eat the
maize stalks, as part of the paga tera arrangement.




246
Di ki manera                                       Tell me how
Di ki manera                                       Tell me how
nos ta biba ne mundu aki,                          we are to live on this earth,
ora mi hasi bon,                                   when I behave well,
pekado di ma hasi malu,                            sinners find that I am misbehaving,
ora mi hasi malu,                                  when I behave badly,
pekado ta marmorami.                               sinners would talk scandal of me.
Di ki manera                                       Tell me how
Di ki manera                                       Tell me how
nos ta biba ne mundu aki,                          we are to live on this earth,
Ma sali kas                                        I left home
Ta kunuku mi ta bai                                On the way to my farm
 Yega port’e kunuku                                When I reached the gate
ata baka den kunuku.”*                             I saw the grazing cows.


On a different level the song emphasizes equality: those with power are sinners just like
those without power. The same notion also appears in the following narrative, which
reflects on death and stresses that there is no distinction between rich and poor, black and
white. In this concept of life, death is life’s leveller. Erquiles Martes, 77 years of age in 1976,
stated in an interview with Brenneker and Juliana: ‘Lamuérté no konosé riku, e no konosé
pober. Bo por ta kon riku ku bo ta, dia yega bo tempu bo mester bai’ (Death does not dis-
tinguish between rich or poor. You can be very rich, but when your time comes you have
to go).” It was through their mortality that plantation owners were revealed to be human
beings. Tokaai reflected on this in the following way:


E shonnan ta’a hasi manera hende ku no ta          The land owners behaved like people who
muri. Ku no ke muri i laga e mundu aki. Mi tin     would not die. Who do not want to die and
mala lenga. Paso ora un hende bisami ku un         leave this world. I have an evil tongue. Because
shon a muri, mi ta bisa: “E no por a muri, paso    when they tell me that one of those people died,
e ta gobernd, eno por muri. Nan no ta kòrda ku     I say: ‘No, he could not have died, because ifyou
tin un Dios ku por kastigá nan. ”                  are in command like that, you cannot possibly
                                                   die. They are not aware that there is a God who
                                                   can smite them down.


This philosophy of death as a leveller is also expressed in the following song.

Di mulena toto na uze                              Di mulena toto na uze”
Ai pober                                           Oh, poor man
di mulena toto na uze                              di mulena toto na uze
Pober mi ta anto                                   I am poor and
Mi mama a nengami                                  My mother has rejected me
Ai, pober ta muri, blanku tambe                    Oh, poor people die, but whites also
Ai, di mulena pober na uze.”                       Ai, di mulena pober na uze.”




                                                                                                247
Several narratives revealed how people had misused their powers to reach their goal. They
would reflect, for example, on how plantation owners could become poor before they died
or experience an agonizing death. This coincides with the concept that everything happens
for a reason: ‘Nada to pasa pornada’ (Nothing just happens) and ‘Kada pakiko tin su
pasombra’ (Everything has its ‘because of’).” This notion is apparent in the following nar-
rative, in which Virginia Meulens recalls a story told to her by her father about a wicked
former slave-owner who used to punish his slaves severely. She explains his agonizing
death as a punishment for the atrocities he had committed.

Mi tata a kontami. Tabatin un homber ku             My father told me. There was a man named
yama Chado. Esei ta bomba sutadó Muhénan            Chado. He was a former slave-driver who used
na estado e ta pone e barika den buraku, anto       to beat people during slavery. Those women
suta nan. Ku e pidi pordon, e hòmber ta bisa:       who were pregnant he would place them with
‘Ainda bo mester di mas. Bo ta muchu vrij-          their belly in a hole, and he would beat them.
postig. Pader sa ku mi a mira e homber ei su        When they begged for pardon, he would say:
morto, dia mi tabata na San Juan. Mi a mira         ‘No, you need more beating. You are too for-
ku dia el a muri, tur su atras tabata dispidi, na   ward. Father, you know, I saw how this man
bichi. E tabatin un kas ku tranké di piedra, tur    came to his end. His backside was all rotten and
e tranké ta na muska. Muska grandi, di e oló ku     full of worms. His home had a fence made of
tabatin den kas. Esei ta pa pasombra el a suta e    stone and this was full of flies. Big flies, because
hendenan. Mal sutá. Su kastigu.”                    of the scent which came from inside his home.
                                                     That was because he used to ill-treat people. Ill-
                                                     treat them very badly. That was his punish-
                                                    ment.



Reference was often made to the attitude of acting arrogant, high (orgullo) or krea idea, as in
the saying: ‘Krea idea no ta sirbi pa nada. Ora morto bini bo no por hibele niun kaminda’
(Acting high does not help you. Because when death comes, you cannot carry it along).
The following song emphasizes acting ‘high’ as a cause for the breach in communication
between God and men.

Ai Dios Weze                                        Oh God Weze
mura kon bon Dios a bai laga nos                    look at how the good Lord has left us
Pakiko nos no por biba laminia na mundu             Why can we not live on earth
manera Shon Dios a bisa nos?                        like Master God has told us?
Nos a buska orgullo, Weze                           We looked for pride, God
Mira kon nos ta ku orgullo ku otro na mundu         Look at how we act high with each other in the
Ai Weze                                             world
P'esei Shon Dios a laga mundu awe.”                 Oh God
                                                    That is why Master God has left the world
                                                    today.


Despite the notion of death as the ultimate leveller, it was at death that Afro-Cura
                                                                                     caoans
focused on respectability. Much effort was made to ensure that the proper rituals
                                                                                        sur-
rounded a dignified burial. Elderly people always stressed in interviews that they paid
                                                                                         the


248
sitter on time, so that they would have a decent burial. These sitters were burial funds esta-
blished by the Roman Catholic Church in the second half of the nineteenth century. They
were a network of people who paid a weekly contribution which was registered in a spe-
cial book (buki di sitter). Through this they could afford a coffin and were sometimes able
to pay for coffin bearers. Some others would have their coffins placed on the rafters of their
roof well before their own death. Some would have their clothes prepared in advance. Peo-
ple would ensure they had a proper family grave (kéldér).
     When, to the shame of the family, funds were insufficient, assistance was often given by
others. Informants would emphasize that when someone died without a coffin ready, fam-
ily members would borrow one and later return it or replace it with a new one.


P.B.: Nan tabatin kaha wardá na kas?               P.B.: People used to keep their coffin in their
                                                   homes?
C.K.: Na kas di mi mama mes tabatin. Ora bo        C.K.: They did. At my mother’s house we had
 ta pober bo ta traha dam, warda awa. Tabata       one. When you are poor, you have to be pre-
filé tambe. Ora un hende ta kasipa muri — tem-     pared. Sometimes they would lend it to other
punan aya mester a dera su siguiente dia mes —     people. When someone was dying — in those
sie hende ei no tin kaha, bo ta fi’é esun di bo.   days you had to bury the person the day after —
Si bo no yuda, Dios no ta yudabo.”                 if they did not have a coffin, you would lend
                                                   them yours. Ifyou don’t help, God will not help
                                                   you.


Although on a death in the community people felt morally obliged to help, help was not
always forthcoming. In 1891 the governor sent a decree stating that an indigent“ who had
died in an institution with neither family nor the Church being able to pay for the funeral,
would be buried in a simple black coffin to be transported in the hearse of the poor,
accompanied by at the most six coffin bearers. People who did not live socially with oth-
ers also had a problem in this field (Rosalia 1989:25).
    The following song was sung during the digging of graves. It is an example that the lack
of communalism portrayed did not necessarily restrict itself to those who were indigent.”
The singer is angry that although he cooperated with people in the past, he did not receive
the due reciprocal help he had expected. He is left to cope alone with his difficult situation.
He is unable to fulfill an act of gratitude towards his mother, as he could not give her a
proper funeral. He had to carry her corpse on a piece of wood. In this song reciprocity and
togetherness are emphasized as important values.

Mi shon, min biba malu                             My shon, I have not lived on bad terms
Ku ningun hende riba mundu                         With anyone on earth
Ai Dios ta rib’un palu                             Oh God it is on a piece of wood that
M’a karga mort’i mi mama                           I carried the corpse of my mother
Mama mama un bela na mi mama                       Mama mama a candle for my mother
Ai Dio’ ta ribun palu                              Oh God it is on a piece of wood that
M’a karga morto di mi mama.”                       I carried the corpse of my mother.




                                                                                              249
Another variant:


Mi shon, mi n° biba malu                       I have not lived on bad
Ku niun pushi ni kachó                         terms with neither a cat nor a dog
Ai Dio) ta riba un palu                        Oh God it is on a piece of wood that
M’a karga mort’t mama.”                        I carried the corpse of my mother.


The number of people present at the activities surrounding a death also indicated the sta-
tus of the deceased in the community. This was likely to be based on social rather than
material factors. Someone knowledgeable on matters of interest for the community, for
example, had high status.
      Attention and assistance would start when someone was dying. Friends, families and
neighbours would gather at the bedside of a person believed to be close to death to offer
help and support. They would bring along items such as coffee, tea and biscuits, and pray
the rosary together, sing religious songs, tell riddles and stories about life. When the per-
son died, this was announced by a kachu-player, someone making a proper death
announcement by blowing the cow horn (kachu). By strategically announcing the death of
a person in a kachu on a hill top a much larger group was mobilized in order to offer emo-
tional and material support to the family of the deceased. Again the number of people who
came to pay their respects was an indication of the social status of the deceased. These
wakes were intercommunity rituals demonstrating solidarity with the bereaved. People
would sit and talk about the deceased or tell stories.
     The corpse was laid out by a labadó di morto, who could also be a woman. All the body
openings were filled with cotton wool drenched in a liquid made of garlic lime, kamfer and
chalk to prevent the escape of gas. The corpse was then displayed in the home of the
deceased. The open casket was placed on a bier between four candles (bela di morto).
Because of that the number four had special significance. The mourners walked to the cof-
fin. Sometimes a special person (Yoradó) would be hired to cry at the funeral, to show that
the deceased was someone who had lived well with the people in his community. People
also went to extremes to organize elaborate funerals. The Catholic Church condemned
this, as it went against the modest behaviour it extolled.”
     After the funeral, family and friends would return to the home of the deceased. On
arriving they had to ritually ‘wash their hands. On a table a wash basin and a pitcher of
water were placed, together with a crucifix, some leaves of the olive-tree, a piece of blue
soap and some holy water (awa bendita). Everyone in turn washed their hands in the basin.
Following this, during eight consecutive nights rituals were conducted, during which peo-
ple prayed the rosary and sang songs. The last night, yukan or ocho dia, was the most
impressive. It was led by a sacristan and the prayers were said in a mixture of Papiamentu
and Latin (also showing the role of the Catholic Church). During that night, similar to
other Afro-Caribbean societies such as Suriname, Nanzi stories and other tales were told.”
This became an integral part of the ocho dia and is even mentioned in the proverb ‘Laga
kuenta pa Ocho dia’ literally: Leave the stories for the eighth day or nine-night ceremony.




250
Trickery
Both de Certeau (1984) and Scott (1990) have approached cunning and trickery amongst
subjugated people as an orientation to life and to the world. They see it as a game being
played out between themselves and the dominant class. In this game, the subordinate
group realizes its own forms of power while complying or appearing to comply with the
dominant image. Within this compliance they can employ several techniques that conceal
and aid them in gaining power. In the case of Curacao the game element in everyday life
is acknowledged in the proverb ‘Kada tambú tin su yorá, kada muhé tin su zoyá i kada bida
tin su anda’: Each drum has its own rhythm, each woman has her own way of wiggling,
and each life has its own way). Hendrikse-Rigaud interprets this as meaning the world is a
stage on which every person plays his part (1994:114).
    According to Scott, powerless people hide behind and gain strength from popular, seem-
ingly innocent oral traditions. The game element is clearly present in aspects of life such as
proverbs, folk tales, visions, gossip, rumours and humour. One example is the genre of the
trickster stories in which the shrewd ‘trickster’, a cunning subordinate, gains the upper hand
over a dominant figure. The common ownership and acceptance of these stories allow the
subordinate to view it as an example of achievement (Scott 1990:126-82). For the Afro-
Curacaoans, Kompa Nanzi is the main figure and is regarded as a hero. Similar to other
Caribbean societies, his heroic status is reflected in the fact that his name became the stories’
generic title (Rhone 2000). In this sense these stories are comparable with the Berr Rabbit
stories in the United States, where scholars have argued that this figure in African-American
folk tales was the symbol of the crafty, underdog enslaved or black person (Dorson 1983:38).
    The theologist Armando Lampe (1988) emphasized the element of resistance within
Nanzi stories and concluded that these were not just children’s stories but ways in which
the Afro-Curacaoans manifested their resistance. Nanzi, as a small spider a seemingly weak
figure, is able to outsmart even the most powerful creatures, such as the tiger and the king,
through his tricks and wit. In reality these stories display the wish of people to transcend
their powerless position. In this sense they are not only an expression of social reality, but
also a denial of it. The search for the opposite in life is also evident in the case of Cheva-
lier, who had killed a man named Johannes. When Chevalier wanted to defend himself in
court, he started by making reference to his skin colour and opposed a common concep-
tion by saying: ‘Even though I am black of colour, I will represent myself.”
    Nanzi was a figure respected for his quick-wittiness. People attributed to themselves or
to a family member the creative resourcefulness of Nanzi, as the following statement
reveals:


Mi tata ta manera Kompa Nanzi. Mt tata taba-      My father is like Kompa Nanzi. My father was
ta un homber, e dianan ayá nan ta yama nan        a man, in those days they would call them intel-
sabi.” E tabata un homber mashá sabi, paso ni     ligent. He was a very intelligent man, because
menernan no tabata por kuné. Ni pastornan no      not even the district master knew how to deal
tabata por kuné. E tabata manera Kompa            with him. Not even the priests knew how to deal
Nanzi.”                                           with him. He was like Kompa Nanzi.




                                                                                              251
Several proverbs emanating from inter-human relationships contain the same underlying
philosophy as the Nanzi stories. For example:

«Si bo bai traha hende bibu bo ta bira nan katibu. If you work with living people you will
   become their slave’ (Hendrikse-Rigaud 1994:26).
«Sinti di hende ta kashi di pikd. ‘Human beings sooner think badly than well’ (Hen-
          drikse-Rigaud 1994:108).
*          Palabrua di: pa motibu di hende bibu mi ta skonde mi kara. “The owl said, because ofliv-
          ing people, I have to hide my face’ (Hendrikse-Rigaud 1994:294).
          Sloke di: maishi chiki na mondi tempu di sekura, ta hende bibu mes a pore. ‘The bird
          sloke (Colinus cristatus)54 said: when you find millet in the wood in the dry period, it
          is because living people have placed it there’ (Hendrikse-Rigaud 1994:295).
-         Guengu di: pa librami di hende bibu mi a bai drumi na lagun. ‘The fish Guengu said: in
          order to free myself from the living people I went to sleep in the lagoon’ (Hendrikse-
          Rigaud 1994:303).
*          Sodldachi di: hende bibu a ponemi karga mi kas riba lomba. “The hermit crab said: it is
          living people who made me carry my home on my back’ (Hendrikse-Rigaud 1994:294).
          Hende bibu ta sentebibu. ‘Living people are just as bitter as aloe’ (Hendrikse-Rigaud
          1994:218).
*         Zumbi di Plánmulina di: si hende bibu no tabata mal hende, guiotin di chumbu lo apasa.
          Zumbi di Makaya di: hende bibu ta mal hende, sino plaka falsu lo a pasa na Kòrsou. “The
          Planmulina ghost said: if living people were not bad, the lead guiotin coin would have
          been accepted as current money. The Makaya ghost said: if living people were not bad,
          counterfeit would have been accepted as genuine money on Curacao’ (Hendrikse-
          Rigaud 1994:278).

These eight proverbs refer to mankind in a negative way: people are not to be trusted. They
have the power to gossip, to curse, to lie and to cheat. These sayings reaffirm what was said
in the previous examples, showing that in post-emancipation society Afro-Curacaoan
daily life was not characterized only by harmony and solidarity. There was also distrust and
a lack of solidarity among people, particularly in difficult situations. The scholars Valde-
mar Marcha and Paul Verweel refer to this as the culture of fear, which is paradoxical in
nature and leads to complicated social relationships (2003:61-2).
    This paradoxical attitude is demonstrated in the ways people regarded trickery, which
was also ambivalent. On the one hand there was condemnation, but on the other hand
there was also respect for someone who was able to trick those with power. When infor-
mants stressed that a certain person was cunning, this was always accompanied by laugh-
ter as a form of consent. As previously stated, the element of trickery was also present in
other stories than those about Nanzi. In the stories told during the ocho dia ceremony the
witty person succeeds in overcoming all challenges. In his book Echa cuenta (1970) Juliana
published several of these stories, which also contain elements of trickery.
    Also in other aspects of everyday life people were respected for their cunning. An exam-
ple of this is the persistence of the Guene language, which allowed people to conceal their
criticisms of those with power. This language was developed as a medium of communica-


    252
tion among the enslaved and was used until the twentieth century (Martinus 1997). It
turned out that on some plantations the inhabitants were prohibited from singing in
Guene, as the owners suspected that they were singing about them.” This was also related
to Brenneker in an interview with Teodoor Coco, born in 1885, who recalled a particular
event on the plantation of San Juan, where someone sang in Guene about a cow on Bonaire
that could not catch him (‘Baka di Boneiru, ma e baka no por kowemi’). The other work-
ers informed the owner of the plantation that the person was singing about him and he
was subsequently punished. Another example was given by an informant born in 1907,
who related how the labourers of the phosphate industry in the eastern part of the island
used to sing about their supervisors in Guene, but lied about the songs’ content to their
overseers”.




Conclusion

 The lives of Afro-Curacaoans were hard due to poverty and the boundaries set by the white
 elite, the State and the Roman Catholic Church. I have looked at how Afro-Cura¢aoans
 created beliefs and meanings which became apparent and were expressed in the concept
 ‘tambu di bida’.
      What stands out is that in their daily struggle to survive they developed numerous cop-
 ing methods generated through their outlook on life. This is clearly manifested in the abi-
 lity to create these methods on an economic, a social and also on a spiritual level. People
 tried to find an outlet through singing, dancing and story-telling, thus making life more
 bearable. It was in this area that women, especially the female tambu singers, contravened
what was deemed respectable behaviour, showing assertiveness and courage in their daily
life.
      On this level they combined their traditional beliefs with the vision of the world they
lived in. The interplay of Catholic saints with good and bad spirits was an example of this.
This was also evident in the value placed on reciprocal help and social assistance. Often
people would unite and perform tasks together. This spirit of interdependence and soli-
darity was an important survival strategy and clearly revealed itself in many areas of life,
not only in economic activities such as harvesting, but also in the case of illness and death.
Most of these actions were motivated by spiritual ideas of what was considered good in
social relationships. In their daily lives people practiced their religiosity and expressed their
creativity within the parameters set by the institutions of power. At the same time, many
sayings refer to the disappointment about unfulfilled expectations of reciprocity among
peers. This might indicate that the decision to reciprocate and cooperate depended on
much more than solely morality and that socio-economic conditions as well as self-inter-
est may also need to be taken into consideration.




                                                                                             Ds)
No tes

      Lampe 1988; Streefkerk 1999, 2003.                                                                :
      Interview Felix Martina (born 21-2-1894), Brenneker/Juliana, 28-3-1978 (T 62, Fundashon Bi-
      blioteka Publiko Korsou).
      ‘Tambw’ refers to the celebration, to the music performed during this event and to the corre-
      sponding dance. If no drum was available, people would improvise using a box, for example, to
      beat the rhythm. See NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement,         Rol van Strafzaken    1878, Pro-
      cesverbaal no. 24 for a description of how people sang while someone beat the rhythm on a box.
      Sometimes a banderita was used to this end: a short verse would be composed and written on a
      small flag. Its lyrical content would express a sly dig at a person (Zikinzá-collection, T 247,
      NatAr). People would buy a banderita with a text that appealed to their feelings. These texts were
      often used for the tambu. The use of a banderita implies a certain degree of literacy, so that it
      probably stems from the period when an increasing number of people could read and write.
      Being able to thus vent one’s opinion on events and on people reveals a kind of openness and
      courage. However, since this was done by using innuendo’s and metaphors it is also clear that too
      direct an approach would meet with negative consequences. At the end of the year district mas-
      ters were extra vigilant. They would report whether the Christmas festivities had been conduct-
      ed peacefully.
      The priest Euwens (1906) observed that due to members of the white class participating in these
      scandalous celebrations, they could not be eradicated.
      Rosalia (1997:139). According to Rosalia, the Afro-Curagaoans sneeringly labelled this celebra-
      tion tambú di senorita, to distinguish it from the real tambu.
      Juliana (1981:19) mentions that in the 1930s this type of request was first heard.
      Interview Wam Sem (1888), Brenneker/Juliana,1959 (Zikinza-collection, T 380 NatAr); Inter-
      view Hose Melano(1905), Brenneker/Juliana,1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 789 NatAr).
      Shon Grandi mes a duna The big master has given
      El a duna awe He has given today
      Interview Victor Bartolomeo (born 1935), Allen/La Croes, 8-3-2000 (personal collection).
      Amigoe, 1-5-1943.
      Interview Victor Bartolomeo (born 1935), Allen/La Croes, 8-3-2000 (personal collection); see
      also Zikinzá-collection, T 380 and T 789 (NatAr).
      Interview Mario and Chilin Martes (8-11-1916), Brenneker/Juliana, 11-4-1984 (Zikinzá-collec-
      tion, T 108 and T 109, NatAr).
      Zikinzá-collection, T 456, NatAr.
      Interview Augustin Bartolomeo (born 1889), Brenneker/Juliana, February 1982 (T 80, Fun-
      dashon Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
      Interview Carlitu Martina (born 1905), Brenneker/Juliana, 26-4-1984 (T 101, Fundashon Biblio-
      teka Públiko Kòrsou).
      Interview Eduardo Tokaai (born 1899), Allen, 12-9-1984 (NatAr).
      Kerstgeschenk 1883:166.
      See, for example, the information about the house of Eliza, which burned down after a candle
      fell from an altar in her home (NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken, Journalen
      Ze en 3e district, inv. no. 177, 4-3-1922/31).
      It was said that he had fathered a child and was therefore closer to humans.
      Interview Virgina Blanken (born 24-8-1901), Brenneker/Juliana, 5-6-1973 (T 32, Fundashon
      Biblioteka Publiko Kòrsou).
      The term ‘zumbi apparently derived from the word ‘zomb?’ (Congo) and refers to the spirits of
      the deceased. Shon Pa (born 1899), interviewed by Juliana and Brenneker, states that a
                                                                                                ‘zumbi’ is
      the soul of an evil person who after death did not get a rest. A ‘zumbi’ can take the form
                                                                                                 of a dog,
      duck, hen or iguana. They are found in the woods and like to live under old trees. A spirit,
                                                                                                   in con-
      trast, can be a good force.



254
      ‘Obeah’ is a term used in the English-speaking Caribbean and refers to folk magic, sorcery and
     religious practices.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 14-5-1872, Procesverbaal no. 19.
     NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Brievenboeken 2e en 3e district, 1905-1919, inv. no. 167,
     29-9-1911/263.
     NatAr, Archief van het gouvernement, Journalen 2e en 3e district, 1906-1935, inv. no. (We, dle
     1911, 5-6-1911.
     NatAr, idem, 3-5-1911.
     La Union, 22-7-1896.
     Joceline Clemencia approached the life of Katalina from a feministic point of view and explains
     why someone like Katalina was condemned in society by the clergy and their followers (1996:83-
     91). Katalina owned cattle and sold homemade bread, biscuits, clothes and the produce of her
   land. She also sold liquor to the workers at the mine company of Santa Barbara and organized
   parties specifically for rich people living in town (1996:83-4). The other woman owned a shop
   and rented different houses.
29 To the amazement of many, despite his handicap Damasio Hooi (Tomas Kokoti) was able to
     work and dance (Zikinzá-collection, T 1103, NatAr). Courlander 1960:20, 84.
30 Zikinza-collection, T 758, NatAr. They would also sing the following song (T 705), which the
     informant Marvelita Comenencia (born 1903, living in Kanga, central Curacao) called kantika di
     8 dia di boutismo (the song after eight days of baptism).
     Mi lenge leidó              My lenge leidó
     Mi lèngè tei den (2x)       My lenge is there
     Mi lèngè leido              My lèngè leidó
     Zè tei den                  Zé is in there
     Mi lèngè leido.             My lèngè leidó.
31   Interview Gerardo Rosario (born 1877), Brenneker/Juliana,      1958 (Zikinzá-collection, T 45,
     NatAr).
32   Sung by Martili Pieters (born 1900, Banda Bou, T 11 and T 13); Martili Pieters in Guene (T 14);
     Francisco Conquet (born 1882, Veeris, T 654); Janchi Doran (born 1886, Wacawa, T 813); Dama-
     sio Hooi (born 1887, Dokterstuin, T 1409). Zikinzá-collection, NatAr.
33   Interview Nicolaas Petrona (born 1898), Allen, 20-5-1989 (NatAr).
34 Rosalia 1997:17.
a5 Interview Erquiles Martes (born 1899), Brenneker/Juliana, 7-10-1976 (T 44 and T 45, Fun-
    dashon Biblioteka Publiko Korsou).
36 Interview Eduardo Tokaai (born 1899), Allen, 12-9-1984 (NatAr).
Sif Interview Joos Marta (born 1885, Wacawa), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 815,
    NatAr).
38 Unable to translate.
ay Unable to translate.
40 Compare the Akan proverbs ‘Biribiara nsi kwa’ (Nothing just happens) and ‘Biribirara won e se
     nti’ (Everything has its ‘because of’) (Gyekye 1987:82).
41   Story told by Virginia Meulens (born 1869; Zikinza-collection, T 437, NatAr).
42   Song sung by Gerardo Rosario (born 1877), living in Banda Riba (Zikinza-collection, T 759 and
   T 760, NatAr).
43 Interview Clementine Kirindingo (born 25-10-1878), Brenneker/Juliana, 27-9-1977 (T 54, Fun-
   dashon Biblioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
44 Indigents were former slaves who received money from the government because they were
   unable to work.
45 NA, Ministerie van Koloniën, 1850-1900, inv. no. 6788, 25-4-1891/234.
46 Most of these songs were called kantika di piki and were sung during digging activities. During
   the harvest celebration several would be transformed by changing the tune or the rhythm to



                                                                                                29
      accommodate the procession (Rosalia 1989). ‘Work songs encourage me to work, said an
      informant who considered himself a good lead-singer as he did not sing wadjo, a term referring
      to the singing of someone who cannot lead the rhythm of the song to correspond with the work
      activity. Those digging the holes with the hoe or with a pickaxe also had to know how to keep
      the rhythm or else they would be sent to do other work ( Interview Nicolaas Petrona (born
      1898), Allen, 20-5-1989 (NatAr).
      Interview Andres Didi Sluis (born 1904), Allen/Ernest Gaari, 3-4-1984 (NatAr). See also song
      sung by Gerardo Rosario (born 1877; Zikinzá-collection, T 315, NatAr).
      Interview Andres Didi Sluis (born 1904), Allen/Ernest Gaari, 29-3-1984 (NatAr).
      La Cruz, 28-4-1915.
      Or people would play a game called speelchi. This was played after twelve o'clock on the nineth
      day and revolved around a cat trying to catch a mouse (Zikinzá-collection, T 530, NatAr).
      NatAr, Archief van het Gouvernement, Rol van Strafzaken 1878, Procesverbaal no. 24.
      The term ‘sabi’ was used for different purposes, for example to refer to people with knowledge
      of medicinal herbs and to people who knew how to solve social conflicts.
      Interview Chilin Martes (born 8-11-1916), Brenneker/Juliana, 22-9-1983 (T 85, Fundashon Bib-
      lioteka Públiko Kòrsou).
      Crested bobwhite.
   Interview Victor Bartolomeo (born 1935), Allen/La Croes, 1-5-2000 (personal collection).
   Interview Teodoor Coco (born 1886), Brenneker/Juliana, 1959 (Zikinzá-collection, T 648,
   NatAr).
SN nterview Simon Bonifacio (born 1907), Allen, 9-5-1989 and 16-5-1989 (NatAr).




256
CHAPTER X
Conclusion: Survival and
Cultural Complexity



 This study concerns the dynamics of Afro-Cura¢aoan social life from 1863 until 1917. It
 explores especially material, family and religious life in the post-emancipation period. The
 historiography of Curacao in the period between the formal abolition of slavery and the
 start of the industrialization process at the beginning of the twentieth century is meagre.
 In addressing this period and these themes, this study is in line with the tendency in
 Caribbean historiography to look at the ways in which the formerly enslaved developed
 their culture and gave meaning to their lives within the limited socio-economic possibili-
 ties available to them in the post-emancipation period.
      In order to give an in-depth view of Afro-Curagaoan life, the use of oral history has been
 central in this study. The written historical sources provide only one side of the past. These
 sources give little insight into how Afro-Curacaoans used their culture to navigate their lives
 through continual forms of control. By using oral histories and interviews, I have tried to
 draw out long forgotten or hidden information about this group. The speakers themselves
 expose, in their own words, how diverse and complex their social reality was. The combina-
tion of different types of written and oral data enables us to better understand the com-
plexity of the cultural dynamics among the Afro-Curagaoan population.
     In addition these data from oral history and tradition provide a particular insight into
the lives of women, who have been doubly silenced in Curagaoan historiography. Princi-
pally in proverbs, but in songs and stories as well, women displayed a consciousness of
their lives, and expressed an awareness of the complexities imposed by race, class and gen-
der-specific barriers. Their concerns included their partnerships with men, their feelings
of happiness and disappointment with their children, their attitudes towards their parents
and the nature of their relationships with other women.
     When using oral data, one has to overcome the fact that oral sources are distinct from
other types of historical primary material because of their continued reliance on memory.
Oral testimonies are not contemporary with the events and issues related, and their
recordings are mostly carried out long after the events have occurred. These data were
therefore used with much caution as indicators of how Afro-Curacaoans continually
reassessed and valorized events and issues that occurred in their daily lives or in those of
their ancestors. Mostly such information was encoded and conveyed values and principles
specific to their culture.
    Oral histories make quite clear the role of cultural meanings in shaping post-emanci-
pation Afro-Curagaoan cultural identities. This emic approach offers an alternative


                                                                                            257
perspective for examining the history of Afro-Curagaoans by looking at the ways people
symbolized and structured their understanding of life. Written sources on the daily life of
people were used for cross-checking the oral sources. Sometimes as little as a sentence in
the written documents gave a further lead to what people had related in their narratives.
The combination of different types of written and oral data enabled me to better under-
stand the complexity of the cultural dynamics among the Afro-Curagaoan group taking
place after emancipation.

This study deals with the close relationship between culture and power - especially the way
in which this becomes manifest in the daily lives of subjugated people. The significance of
the link between power and culture resounds in the particular social, political and racial
matrix that shaped Afro-Curacaoan life both in the pre- and post-emancipation periods.
Even though my study explores power relations and how these were experienced by mar-
ginalized people, I have tried to go beyond the bipolarity of resistance and domination
prevalent in older resistance theories. Instead, I attempt to demonstrate that subjugated peo-
ple in their daily lives do much more than merely resist and oppose external social forces.
     I suggest that post-emancipation daily life for Afro-Curagaoans was not one of con-
tinuous tension and conflict. Social life also encompassed integration, social cohesion,
solidarity and cooperation, as the former enslaved people negotiated within and outside of
their social groups, struggling to survive within the constraints of the existing asymmetric
power relations. The cultural dynamics and identities that evolved in and from these social
interactions were complex, multidimensional in scope, and fluid.
     The seeds for the cultural complexity which characterized post-emancipation social
life were sown during slavery. The way Afro-Curacaoans created and developed their social
life after freedom in 1863 was rooted in the previous period of enslavement. The formal
abolition of slavery did not mean an entirely new life for those who had received their free-
dom. While they faced new challenges, their economic and social lives continued to be
marked by the legacies of the past.
     Curagao did not correspond with the conventional definition of a slave society where
slavery was ubiquitous and central to the functioning of the economy. The island was not
a monoculture of large-scale slave plantations determining the social life of an over-
whelming majority of enslaved people. The proportion of freedpeople was relatively large
and always growing. Rather than plantation agriculture, commerce was a distinguishing
feature of the insular economy.
     During the early phases of the transatlantic slave trade, Curacao was a major transit
port for enslaved Africans brought in Dutch ships destined to be sold again to mainland
Spanish colonies. In that sense Curacao holds a unique position in Caribbean slave soci-
eties. Until the beginning of the eighteenth century, a significant part of the enslaved pop-
ulation was comprised of people only temporarily living on the island, waiting to be
deported to the Spanish Main. The continuous influx of enslaved Africans may have
shaped a diasporic culture among the enslaved Afro-Curacaoans who remained informed
of the African dynamics of the transatlantic trafficking in human beings.
     The factors which influenced the deportation of some slaves to the mainland and the
retention of others have not yet been satisfactorily studied. Slave-owners from the Spanish


258
Main and the island’s commercial elite expressed preferences for African captives from
specific ethnic groups and areas, which must have influenced the ethnic constellation of
the group remaining on the island. Some researchers suggest a local preference for keep-
ing people from Luango (Angola) on the island, as many of these could act as interpreters
between the Europeans and the newly imported enslaved people. This implicates that
specifically these Luango slaves were early creolizers. The term ‘Luango is recurring in the
memories of Afro-Curacaoan descendants through stories, songs and proverbs as an
example of African origin as well. In the course of slavery, ‘Luango’ became a common
mark of distinction between the African-born and creole enslaved people.
     Environmental conditions deeply affected Curagaoan society. Insufficient rainfall ren-
dered it almost unviable for plantation agriculture. Subsistence farming was dominant and
of concern for all members of society. This had a direct impact on the form of enslavement,
the economic viability of the plantations, the type of labour demands and the nature of
social relationships. On most plantations the enslaved combined different types of work.
     Except for a few plantations in the western part of the island, most Curagaoan planta-
tions were small in size. This impacted on the nature of relationships both within and out-
side the social group. A noticeable characteristic resulting from the economic fragility of
most plantations was that slave-owners often allowed their enslaved workers significant
geographical mobility. Men were hired out to work in town as artisans, women as domes-
tic servants. A high number of enslaved people thus worked and lived in an urban setting,
with a culture markedly different from that in the countryside. Craftsmen in particular
were able to improve their economic conditions and to further develop their skills. They
formed a group much sought after both on the island and abroad. Enslaved males would
also be hired out to work as seamen in order to provide a monetary income for their own-
ers. Even though there was significant maritime marronage, most of these enslaved sailors
kept returning to the island, perhaps, as Price states, because of family ties.
     One of the distinguishing features of slavery on Curagao was the fact that the number
of manumitted people, both black and of mixed race, grew considerably due to frequent
manumissions. Some of these were formerly enslaved people who themselves or their fam-
ilies had been able to buy their freedom. Others were old and handicapped people whose
owners simply disposed of them as economic liabilities: they gained their freedom when
their owners could or would no longer continue feeding them. This unhappy group did
not enjoy a smooth transformation from enslavement to freedom and was left to fend for
itself. By entering freedom under the worst social conditions, these disadvantaged former
slaves continued to be socially marginalized.
     Frequent miscegenation led to a significant number of people of mixed race in socie-
ty. Their roots lay with the children from unions between white slave-owners and black
enslaved women. With some frequency, the white fathers gave their children their freedom.
The relationship between these masters and their coloured mistresses and offspring was
marked by social ties that seemed less racially polarized and to a certain extent even har-
monious. Certainly, in this multiracial society, the group of mixed origins enjoyed a privi-
leged status above the black population.
     The social structure was therefore characterized by increasing complexity, both within
and outside the sphere of the plantation. By the mid-nineteenth century, the Afro-


                                                                                         259
Curacaoan population had steadily grown and had achieved significant diversity in terms
of skin colour, class, and probably culture.

After emancipation, the Roman Catholic Church reinforced its involvement with the Afro-
Curacaoan population, leaving a strong mark on its cultural identity. The Church intro-
duced educational activities, such as instruction in reading and writing, and tried to trans-
form Afro-Curacaoan culture by instilling its moral views on right and wrong in beliefs
and everyday practices. The Church attempted to eradicate cultural conventions and prac-
tices it considered heathenish remnants of an African past.
     At emancipation, society was heavily segmented along socio-economic and correspond-
ing racial and colour lines. Afro-Curacaoans who during the pre-emancipation period had
been able to acquire their freedom as well as material resources, primarily land, could con-
tinue to live in fairly reasonable conditions. The majority instead - both those who had only
become free on 1 July 1863 and those already freed before that date but without many
resources - remained socially marginalized.
     Basically as a rule, there were insufficient employment opportunities. The worrying
question posited at the time of emancipation was not so much whether the freed would be
willing to work, but rather whether there would be sufficient work for them to do in the
first place. At the same time, the remaining plantation owners demanded a disciplined
labour force ready to perform disciplined work when occasionally their labour was need-
ed. This request went against the freedpeople’s increasing desire for more mobility and
autonomy. Many overcame their dependency and insecurity by looking for work outside
of the plantations, either as urban workers or as independent peasants in the countryside.
Clearly the former masters and their former slaves did not see eye to eye as to the mean-
ing of freedom. This led to recurring clashes.
     In the first decades after emancipation, the plantation owners continued their mecha-
nisms of control. They successfully imposed the ‘paga tera system’ on those former slaves
who continued to live on their plantations. This system was already developing in the pre-
emancipation period as a means of controlling manumitted slaves. The paga tera system
created a group of men and women living in a situation of semi-serfdom, being depen-
dent for work and living space on their former slave-owners.
     These people living under the paga tera system had very few rights. Their dependency
was exposed in accusatory oral histories. Many considered the paga tera as a brutal con-
tinuation of the planters’ domination of their lives. Adults, and their children and even
their grandchildren, were trapped in the spiral of domination, so memory tells.
     One way of becoming autonomous and to evade the power of the plantation owners
was to acquire a piece of land of one’s own through the government. In the first decades
after abolition this was not easy, as the amount of government land was limited and as in
addition the government tended to side with the plantation owners against the petition-
ers. In each case, the individual petitioner’s personality had to be assessed. Government
officials made their decision based on a character reference usually given by the owner of
the plantation on which the applicant had lived. This reference was more than likely to
meet his self-interest.




260
Often the only remaining option was to squat on the meagre sabana, pieces of land over
which plantation owners assumed the privilege of grazing their animals. The squatting of
the sabana led to clashes between plantation owners and inhabitants over its tenure. This
ranged from direct opposition to the rules and regulations laid down to favour those in
power to more covert ways of resistance.
     Resistance had a cultural dimension, as in the celebrating of tambu dancing and
singing on this squatted land, much to the disgust of the plantation owners. In doing so,
these Afro-Curacaoan squatters also dragged along those who lived nearby under the paga
tera system, who were explicitly forbidden to engage in such expressions. Tambú was
believed to have a demoralizing effect.
     By the end of the nineteenth century, the land policy of the government started to give
out more land to the poor. Even though it still sought advice regarding the personal char-
acters of the petitioners from the plantation owners, the government now also relied on
advice given by its own district masters. From this same period we have indications that
some petitioners at least would not accept a negative decision and would continue to chal-
lenge this through legal procedures.
      Once these peasants gained access to land, they used it for mixed-farming. Millet was
the prime subsistence produce for local consumption. Previously, during slavery, they had
cultivated millet on the small pieces of land on the plantation grounds - kunuku - allotted
to them for subsistence farming. Millet was a domesticated agricultural product originat-
ing from Africa. The mainstay of subsistence agriculture was thus based on a traditional
knowledge system transferred from Africa and adapted to the new conditions. This exper-
tise became part of the indigenous practice of survival applied on the plantations as well
as in their own gardens. In addition, peasants kept animals such as goats, domesticated
pigs and chickens. The more successful ones would be able to use a donkey for transport-
ing goods from the countryside to town and vice versa.
     Increasingly Afro-Curagaoans attempted to leave the poverty of the countryside to set-
tle in the town of Willemstad, hoping to find better opportunities. This trend was opposed
by the plantation owners who feared a shortage of labour. The new arrivals were soon met
with the harsh realities of town life. There was some demand for labour in trade, the har-
bour and in craftwork. Nevertheless, in times of little demand for such labour, having a
piece of land in the countryside could be crucial.
    Divergent perceptions of life style developed: urban life came to be identified with cun-
ningness, bravery and civilized behaviour, while rural identity was associated with docili-
ty, submissiveness and stupidity as well as uncivilized behaviour. Urban values were more
associated with an increasingly sought alternative among Afro-Cura¢aoans, this being
labour migration. As elsewhere in the Caribbean, migration became a coping strategy and
indeed a way of life of many men. Hundreds of Afro-Curagaoan males emigrated to sev-
eral countries in Latin America and the Caribbean in the later nineteenth century.
    In 1917 the largest labour migration took place, to the sugar fields of Cuba. Curacao
then stood at the threshold of a transition from a pre industrial society to an industrial
one. For some migration was successful, in the sense that they returned with funds and
were able to buy land and other properties. The largest group, however, returned as social-
ly destitute as they had left.


                                                                                          261
These migrations, both within the island and outside of it, played an important role in the
further development of Afro-Curagaoan culture. Particularly intra-regional migration led
to a cross-fertilization of local cultures with other Caribbean cultures. This manifested
itself in the areas of religion, music and dance. For example, returnees from Cuba took
with them musical instruments such as the guitar, bongos, tres and the marimbula. These
returnees would transmit their cultural experiences to their home culture. Some formed
musical groups, known as banda di bongo (bongo bands), which became very popular on
Curacao and contributed to the spread of the large variety of Cuban music on the island,
such as the son, guanguanco, rumba and mambo. Many of these songs and rhythms were
subsequently sung and composed in the local language, Papiamentu.

The Roman Catholic Church retained its position as a major cultural institution in the life
of Afro-Curacaoans. For the Church, the abolition of slavery meant less interference by
former slave-owners and therefore more room for what it believed to be the moral uplift-
ing of the lower classes. The clergy focused on ‘civilizing’ their values, beliefs and norms in
all areas of life.
     This civilizing mission focused on social aspects of life neglected by the other institu-
tions of power, the colonial State and the socio-economic elites. The clergy would
denounce the poor living conditions of the Afro-Curacaoans and where necessary and
possible provided relief help. The Church maintained a firm line in what it considered cor-
rect and moral behaviour, both through preaching and formal education among the
younger generation. It tried to redefine every stage of the life cycle, from the day someone
was born until he died. The clergy imposed their authority in rituals after birth, in initia-
tion into manhood and womanhood, in marriage, last rites and burials.
     Of course, the Church rejected all traces of religious belief which deviated from
Catholicism. Life styles identified as heathenish were strongly condemned. The Church
tried to penetrate more deeply than the colonial State into the private, domestic and social
lives of its flock. Afro-Curacaoans responded to this civilizing drive in sometimes para-
doxical ways. Apart from the specific spiritual meanings, abiding by the value system of the
Church provided advantages both in an economical and a social sense.
     For example, some poor people who were close to the priests would be able to acquire
a piece of land through the mediation of the Church. Others were able to ascend hierar-
chically through Catholic education and subsequently in work. In their daily lives they
obeyed the norms set by the Church. Their behaviour conformed to the codes of
‘respectability. At the same time, Afro-Curagaoan culture developed through the creative
re-appropriation of Catholic values, norms and practices and their reinterpretation
according to local traditional practices and values.
     A graphic example of this paradoxical appropriation was the idealization of the ideal
of biba un bida drechi (living a respectable life). This concept was introduced by the
Church to encourage couples of opposite sex to institutionalize their relationship in a
monogamous and stable marriage. While this became an accepted norm of respectability,
at the same time there remained wide acceptance of male relationships outside of this ide-
 alized code.



262
The codes imposed by the Church were at once formally accepted but in actual practice
challenged. Another striking example is the seú ceremony celebrated after the millet har-
vest in March and April. The set was accepted by the Roman Catholic Church and the
elites, who considered it a harmless expression of gratitude to God for having received a
good harvest. But these celebrations also contained elements of opposition and negotia-
tion. Thus the seú celebrations started with indeed seemingly harmless work songs, but
ended with the ‘vulgar’ and ‘heathenish’ tambu, a dance abhorred by both Church and the
colonial State.
     In this seu, several contradictory values were acted out. Thus the acts of toro manzinga
and toro mansebo performed during this celebration expressed male identity and mas-
culinity. Yet another example of this reinterpretation of cultural elements is the custom of
wak èzè practiced during the eight days before a baby was baptized in Church. Other exam-
ples refer to the rituals surrounding death and burial, in which Roman Catholic rituals
were combined with African derived ones. Catholic Saints such as San Antoni, San Juan
and San Pedro were venerated in quite different ways from those dictated by the Catholic
faith. Afro-Curacaoan veneration included drumming, dancing and non-Catholic sym-
bolisms.

As I have tried to demonstrate in the preceding Chapters, the life of most Afro-Curacaoans
was characterized by a continuous struggle for survival. Struggles for land, for economic
survival and for security were coupled to a drive to achieve dignity and to combine values
imposed by the ‘white’ institutions with cultural practices, some of which originated in
Africa and others developed in a long period of slavery. In all of this, the internal differen-
tiation among the Afro-Curagaoan majority increased along the dimensions of class, eth-
nicity, gender, generation and area of domicile.
     Cultural complexity characterizes the lives of Afro-Curagaoans. While they built sur-
viving mechanisms in all spheres of life, they also developed values relating to mutual help,
social assistance and reciprocity. This spirit of interdependence and solidarity manifested
itself in many areas of life, such as in shared labour, during harvest time, at child birth, on
the building of a home, during illness and on death, but also in a range of recreational
activities. However, there is little reason to assume that a spirit of solidarity always reigned
supreme. Equally there is no ground to make up an idealized image of a valiant people
constantly defying the institutions of power. Alongside and perhaps more clearly than
resistance, accommodation held sway.

The leading question of this thesis was ‘What role did the State, the former slave-owners and
the Roman Catholic Church play in the lives of Afro-Curacaoans in the post-emancipation
era, in what ways did Afro-Curagaoans shape their own material, social and spiritual lives,
either within, outside or in opposition to the constraints of these institutions?
    I have attempted to demonstrate throughout this thesis that an immense asymmetry in
power relations characterized Curagaoan society. The vast African-origins majority of the
population had only limited access to the island’s natural resources monopolized by the
white elites both during and after slavery. Even after emancipation, it took the colonial
State decades to develop a land policy which at least started to take the interests of the


                                                                                             263
Afro-Curacaoan population seriously. The same can be observed of the provision and reg-
ulation of work.
    The Roman Catholic Church had its own agenda of ‘civilization. The imbuing of the
former slave population with Catholicism was envisioned as a package including the
enforcing (sometimes by means of corporal punishment) of a ‘western’ work ethic, law
obedience, disciplined kinship patterns characterized by the nuclear family, and the extinc-
tion of what was considered African ‘heathenish’ culture.
    While the great majority of the formerly enslaved population eventually became
Catholic, the wider ‘package’ became anything but universal. The popular culture which
evolved in the post-emancipation period was marked by a mixture of resistance to the
pressures of the ‘white world’ as well as the adoption of local variations of the models
imposed by the State and particularly the Church. In the process, the Afro-Curagaoan pop-
ulation became gradually more diverse within itself, along the lines of class, colour, gender
and generation.



Note

1     Bongos: two small drums joined by a piece of wood, held on the lap. One plays with the finger
      and the palm of the hand. Tres: three-stringed guitar, typical of Cuba, mainly used in son and
      punto guajiro. Marimbula: instrument used by son groups.




264
Archival Records, Oral Documents
and Bibliography

Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-Land en Volkenkunde (KITLV)
Koloniale Verslagen, 1863-1918
National Archives, The Hague (NA)
Ministerie van Kolonién, 1850-1900
Ministerie van Kolonién, Gouvernementsjournalen, Suriname en Curacao, serie A, 1901-1952
National Archives Netherlands Antilles, Willemstad, Curacao (NatAr)
Archief van het Gouvernement
    Administratie van Financién 3-38, Brievenboeken, 1846-1893
    Brievenboeken 125-130. Brievenboeken 5 district, 1863-1904
    Brievenboeken 131-138. Brievenboeken 2° district, 1863-1905
    Brievenboeken 139-146. Brievenboeken 3° district, 1863-1906
    Brievenboeken 147-154. Brievenboeken 4€ district, 1863-1906
    Brievenboeken 161-172. Brievenboeken 2© en 3° district, 1905-1919
    Contracten van huurgronden 5° district, 1886-1924
    Districtbeheer 1-34. Algemeen, Ingekomen stukken 2° district, 1816-1905
    Districtbeheer 35-56. Ingekomen stukken 3° district, 1860-1905
    Districtbeheer 57-73. Ingekomen stukken 4° district, 1863-1906
    Districtbeheer 74-81. Ingekomen stukken 5 district, 1884-1906
    Districtbeheer 82-95. Ingekomen stukken 4 en 5£ district, 1906-1920
    Districtbeheer 96-121. Ingekomen stukken 2° en 3° district, 1906-1924
    Gouverneur, Ingekomen geheime stukken 3658-3685, 1845-1932
    Gouvernementsbeschikkingen 122-124. Ingekomen Gouvernementsbeschikkingen 4° district,
    1863-1867
Inventaris van het archief van het Gouvernementssecretarie, Ingekomen stukken, Buitendistricten
    Curagao 1862, inv. no. 3686, 31-10-1862/238
Inventaris van de Archieven der Districtmeesters van het 36, 4© en 5© district, 1856-1940
    Kolekshon Juliana/Brenneker)
    Journalen 173-177. Journalen 2© en 3° district, 1906-1935
    Journalen 178-182. Journalen 4£ en 5£ district, 1908-1930
    Minuten van uitgaande stukken 189-203, 2° district, 1926-1934, 1938
    Parket van den Procureur-generaal, inv. no. 484, 28-5-1911
Archief Hof van Justitie: Rol van Strafzaken, 1873-1917
Notariële archieven (Curagao)
Notariële protocollen 1846-1854, inv. no. 19, 16-1-1852,15
Notariële protocollen 1846-1854, inv. no. 19, 13-2-1852,41
Notariële protocollen,1846-1957, inv. no. 53, 9-7-1863,151
Notariële protocollen, 1846-1957, inv. no. 53, 10-7-1863,155
Notariële protocollen, 1846-1957, inv. no. 53, 17-7-1863,159
Publicatie Blad A 1863, no. 11
Publicatie Blad A 1863, no. 23
Publicatie Blad A 1863, no. 17
Publicatie Blad A 1863, no. 18



                                                                                            265
Oral Documents
                                                                                              stored
Tapes Zikinzá-collection, interviews collected by Paul Brenneker and Elis Juliana, 1958-1960,
        at the National Archives, Willemstad (NatAr).
Tapes Brenneker/Juliana, interviews collected by Paul Brenneker and Elis Juliana, 1963-1989, stored
        at the Public Library, Willemstad (Fundashon Biblioteka Publiko Korsou).
Tapes Archeologisch-Antropologisch Instituut Nederlandse Antillen (AAINA), collected by Rose
        Mary Allen, 1980-1995, stored at the National Archives, Willemstad (NatAr).
Tapes Oral History Project in preparation of the documentary ‘Bosnan skondi’ (Hidden Voices) by
        Jeanne Henriquez and Rose Mary Allen, July 1992, Institute of Archaeology and Anthropolo-
        gy of the Netherlands Antilles and Centre for the Development of Women (SEDA), stored at
        the National Archives, Willemstad (NatAr).
Tapes Rose Mary Allen, collected by Rose Mary Allen, 1999-2005, private collection.



Bibliography
Abbring, H.J.
1834        Weemoedstoonen uit de geschiedenis van mijn leven, of mijne reis naar Curacao, en vlugtige
            beschouwingen van dat eiland gedurende mijn tienjarig verblijfop hetzelve. Groningen: W.
            van Boekeren.
Abraham-van der Mark, Eva Elisabeth
1973       Yui Mama. Enkele facetten van de gezinsstructuur op Curacao. Assen: Van Gorcum. [PhD
           thesis, University of Amsterdam. |
Abrahams, Roger D.
1992       Singing the Master. The Emergence of African-American Culture in the Plantation South.
            New York [etc]: Penguin Books.
Allen, Rose Mary
1988            ‘El Seti. Fiesta tradicional de la cosecha de maiz en Curazao’, in: Francisco J. Gomez
                (ed.), El folklore Latinoamericano y del Caribe. Memorias de las ponencias del Segundo
                Seminario del Folklore Latinoamericano y del Caribe, p. 55-78. Caguas/ Puerto Rico:
                Departamento de Cultura, Municipio de Caguas.
1988            ‘The Dialectics of Folk Culture. The Influence of the Roman Catholic Church on the
                Folk Culture of Curacao.’ Paper presented at the Symposium ‘Religion, Power and Ide-
                ology in Latin America and the Caribbean, 46th International Congress of American-
                ists. Amsterdam, 4-8 July 1988.
1992a           ‘Katholicisme en volkscultuur: een dialectische relatie: een aanzet tot de studie van het
                ‘beschavingswerk’ van de Curacaose rooms-katholieke kerk in de periode 1824-1915”,
                in: Boudewijnse, B., H. Middelbrink, C. van de Woestijne (eds), Kerkwandel & leken-
                handel. De Rooms-Katholieke kerk op Curacao, p. 15-30. Amsterdam: Het Spinhuis.
1992b           ‘Curagaoan Women’s Role in the Migration to Cuba’ in: Richenel Ansano, et al. (eds),
                Mundu yama sinta mira. Womanhood in Curagao, p. 59-75. Curacao: Fundashon Pub-
                likashon.
2001a           Ta Cuba mi ke bai. Testimonio di trahadónan ku a emigrd for di Kòrsou bai Cuba na
                kuminsamentu di siglo XX. Zaltbommel: ICS Nederland/Curacao.
2001b           ‘Het volksleven op plantage Porto Mari eind negentiende eeuw/begin twintigste eeuw.
                [Oral History Project under the Assignment of Plantation Porto Mari, Curacao. |
2003            ‘Acceptatie of uitsluiting. Enkele belangrijke invalshoeken voor de discussie over beeld-
                vorming over immigranten uit de regio en over de Curacaoénaars’, in: R.M. Allen, Coen
                Heijes, Valdemar Marcha (eds), Emancipatie & acceptatie. Curacao en Curagaoënaars.
                Beeldvorming en identiteit honderdveertig jaar na de slavernij, p. 72-90. Amsterdam: Uit-
                geverij SWP.


266
Allen, William Francis, Charles Pickard Ware and Lucy McKim Garrison (eds)
1997         Slave Songs of the United States. Baltimore Maryland: Genealogical Publishing Co. [First
              edition 1867.
Alofs, Luc, et al; Leo Dalhuisen, et al. ( eds)
1997        Geschiedenis van de Antillen: Aruba, Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Sint Eustatius, Sint Maarten.
            Zutphen: Walburg Pers.
Amigoe di Curacao
1883-1941 Amigoe di Curacao. Weekblad voor de Curacaosche eilanden. Willemstad: s.n.
1924        ‘Geschiedenisonderwijs of niet? Amigoe di Curacao, 4-10-1924.
Anonymus
1946        Proverbionan Papiamentu. Curacao: La Cruz.
Ansano, Richenel
1988        ‘Social Transformations and Symbolic Representations in Afro-Curacaoan religions.
            Paper presented at the Symposium ‘Religion, Power and Ideology in Latin America and
            the Caribbean, 46th International Congress of Americanists. Amsterdam, 4-8 July 1988.
1990        ‘Balia ku almasola or ‘dance with the lone soul’: social transformations and symbolic
            representations in Afro-Cura¢aoan religions, in Rose Mary Allen; Paul Jan van Gelder
            (eds), Op de bres voor eigenheid: afhankelijkheid en dominantie in de Antillen, p. 165-189.
            Amsterdam: Caraibische Werkgroep AWIC, Universiteit van Amsterdam.
1996        ‘Folklore and Economic Change in 20th Century Curagao) in E. Ayubi (ed.), Papers of
            the Third Seminar on Latin-American and Caribbean Folklore, p. 41-62. Curacao:
            AAINA. Reports of the Archaeological-Anthropological Institute of the Netherlands
            Antilles (AAINA), No. 12.
Ansano, Richenel, Joceline Clemencia, Jeanette Cook, et al. (eds)
1992        Mundu yama sinta mira. Womanhood in Curacao. Curacao: Fundashon Publikashon.
Appadurai, Arjun
1990        ‘Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy. Theory, Culture & Society
              7(2/3): 295-310.
Arewa, E. Ojo and Alan Dundes
1964          ‘Proverbs and the Ethnography of Speaking Folklore’, American Anthropologist 66(6):
              70-85.
Awedoba, A.K.
2000       An Introduction to Kasena Society and Culture Through Their Proverbs. Lanham, Md.:
            University Press of America.
Baart, W.J.
1983          Cuentanan di Nanzi. Een onderzoek naar de oorsprong, betekenis en functie van de Papia-
              mentse spinverhalen. Amsterdam: Rodopi. [PhD thesis, University of Leiden.|
Barbanson, W. de
1934          ‘Simadam,, Lectuur voor de Leden van den Sint Dominicus-Penning 111(1934): 25-43.
Barrow, Christine
1996          Family in the Caribbean. Themes and Perspectives. Kingston: Ian Randle Publishers.
Barrow, Christine and Rhoda Reddock (eds)                                                     .
2002          Caribbean Sociology. Introductory Readings. Kingston, Jamaica: Ian Randle Publishers.
Barth, F.
1989          ‘The Analysis of Culture in Complex Societies’, Ethnos 54(3-4): 120-42.
Bauman, Richard
1983       ‘The Field Study of Folklore in Context) in: Richard M. Dorson (ed.), Handbook of Ame-
           rican Folklore, p. 362-8. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Bauman, Richard (ed.)                                            .                   Ee
1992       Folklore, Cultural  Performances, and Popular Entertainments . A Communication s-cente-
           red Handbook. New York: Oxford University Press.



                                                                                                   267
                                                                                                     .
Beckles, Hilary
2002         Working slavery, pricing freedom. Perspectives from the Caribbean,   Africa and the Afri-
             can diaspora’ in: Verene A. Shepherd (ed.), Working Slavery, Pricing Freedom. Perspecti-
             ves from the Caribbean, Africa and the African Diaspora, p. 320-39. Kingston, Jamaica:
             Ian Randle Publishers.
Beckles, Hilary and Verene A. Shepherd (eds)
1991         Caribbean Slave Society and Economy. A Student Reader. Kingston, Jamaica: lan Randle
            Publishers/London: James Currey.
2000        Caribbean slavery in the Atlantic world: a student reader. Kingston, Jamaica: lan Rand-
            le ; Oxford: James Currey ; Princeton, NJ: M. Weiner.
Ben-Amos, Dan
1977       ‘Introduction. Folklore in African Society’ in: Bernth Lindfors (ed.), Forms of Folklore in
            Africa. Narrative, Poetic, Gnomic, Dramatic, p. 1-36. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Benjamins D. en Joh. F. Snelleman (eds)
1914-1917 Encyclopaedie van Nederlandsch West-Indië. Gravenhage [etc.]: Martinus Nijhoff [etc.].
Berlin, Ira and Philip D. Morgan
1993          Cultivation and Culture. Labor and the Shaping of Slave Life in the Americas. Charlottes-
              ville: University Press of Virginia.
Berry-Haseth, L.
1994         ‘Banderita, Kristof 9(2): 1-10.
Besson, Jeanne
1992         ‘Freedom and community: the British West’ in: Frank McGlynn and Seymour Dresch-
             er (eds), The Meaning of Freedom. Economics, Politics, and Culture after Slavery, p. 183-
             219. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
2001         ‘Empowering and engendering hidden histories in Caribbean peasant communities) in:
             Thomas Bremer and Ulrich Fleischmann (eds), History and histories in the Caribbean,
             p. 69-113. Frankfurt am Main: Vervuert, Madrid: Iberoamericana.
2002         Martha Brae’s Two Histories. European Expansion and Caribbean Culture Building in
            Jamaica. Chapel Hill [etc]: University of North Carolina Press.
Beurs- en Nieuwsberichten
1935-1994 Beurs- en Nieuwsberichten. [Newspaper] [Willemstad; s.n.]. Willemstad: Curacaose
             Drukkerij en Uitgevers Mij; Willemstad: De Stad.
Blassingame, John
IQ?          The Slave Community. Plantation Life in the Antebellum South. New York: Oxford Uni-
             versity Press.
Blink, H.
1905-1907    Neerlandsch Oost en West-Indië. Geographisch, ethnographisch en economisch beschreven.
             Leiden: Brill.
Blussé, Leonard, Frans-Paul van der Putten, Hans Vogel (eds)
1996         Pilgrims to the Past. Private Conversations with Historians of European Expansion.
             [CNWS Publications.] Leiden: Research School CNWS.
Boeke, J.
1907-1919    Rapport betreffende een voorloopig onderzoek naar den toestand van de visscherij en de
             industrie van zeeproducten in de kolonie Curagao. ’s-Gravenhage: Belifante (2 vols).
Boekhorst te, Peter, Peter Burke, Willem Frijhoff
1992         Cultuur en maatschappij in Nederland 1500-1850. Een historisch-antropologisch perspec-
             tief. Meppel: Boom.
Bolland, O. Nigel
1981         ‘Systems of Domination after Slavery. The Control of Land and Labour in the British
             West Indies after 1838, Comparative Studies in Society and History 23(4): 591-619.
1997         Struggles for Freedom. Essays on Slavery, Colonialism, and Culture in the Caribbean and
             Central America. Belize City: Angelus Press; Kingston, Jamaica: Ian Randle Publishers.


268
2002         ‘The Hundredth Year of Our Emancipation. The Dialectics of Resistance in Slavery and
             Freedom, in: Verene A. Shepherd (ed.), Working Slavery, Pricing Freedom. Perspectives
             from the Caribbean, Africa and the African Diaspora, p. 320-39. Kingston, Jamaica: Ian
             Randle Publishers.
Bosch, G.B.
1985        Reizen in West-Indié. Facsimile reprint, Amsterdam: Emmering. [First published in
             1829-1836 (2 vols).]
Bossers, Geert
2000         ‘Een wetboek van strafrecht voor de West-Indische koloniën) Pro Memorie. Bijdragen tot
             de Rechtsgeschiedenis der Nederlanden 2(2): 234-55.
Boudewijnse, B, H. Middelbrink, C. van de Woestijne (eds)
1992         Kerkwandel & lekenhandel. De Rooms-Katholieke kerk op Curacao. Amsterdam: Het
             Spinhuis.
Braasem, W.A.
1956         Sprookjes van Noord- en Zuid-Amerika. Amsterdam: van der Peet.
Brada, W.M.
1957         Bisschop Niewindt 1842-1852. Willemstad: [s.n.]
1958         Laatste jaren van Mgr. Niewindt 1852-1860. Curacao: [s.n.]
1961         Kerkgeschiedenis Curacao 1680-1707 ;Curagao 1861.Willemstad: [s.n.]
1963         Kerkgeschiedenis Antillen. Willemstad: [s.n.]
Brathwaite, Edward
1974         Contradictory Omens: Cultural Diversity and Integration. Mona, Kingsto: Savacou.
Breemen PJ. van,
1909a        Visscherij in de tropen. Curacaosche Maatschappij tot bevordering van Landbouw, Veeteelt,
             Zoutwinning en Visscherij. Curagao: De Curagaosche Courant.
1909b        Verslag over den toestand van de visserij in de kolonie Curagao, 18-2-1909, in: Han-
             delingen der Staten-Generaal. Bijlagen, 1909-1910, Curagao.
Brenneker, Paul
1947         Bonaire. Een rustig eilandje in de Caraïbische Zee. Curagao: Drukkerij Scherpenheuvel.
1958         Liketé minawá. Cantica dje dushi tempu bieuw. Curacao: Boekhandel St. Augustinus.
1959         Benta. Dos cien cantica dje dushi tempu bieuw. Curacao: Boekhandel St. Augustinus.
1961         Curacaoensia. Folkloristische aantekeningen over Curacao. Curagao: Boekhandel St.
             Augustinus.
1962         Missie-methodiek. Curagao: s.n.
1963         Proverbio. Curagao: Boekhandel St. Augustinus.
1966         Brua. Curagao: s.n.
1969-
1975         Sambumbu. Volkskunde van Curacao, Aruba en Bonaire. Curacao: Centrale Drukkerij.
1986         Zjozjoli. Gegevens over de volkskunde van Curacao, Aruba, Bonaire en Curacao. Curacao:
             Instant Printing Services.
Brereton, Bridget                                                                                %
1988         ‘General Problems      and  Issues in Studying   the History  of Women,    in: Patricia
             Mohammed and Catherine Shepherd (eds), Gender in Caribbean Development, p. 123-
             41. Papers presented at the Inaugural Seminar of the University of the West Indies
             Women and Development Studies Project, St. Augustine. Trinidad: Women in Develop-
             ment Projects, University Press of the West Indies.
Brereton, Bridget and Kevin A. Yelvington (eds)
1999         ‘The Colonial Caribbean in Transition. Essays on Postemancipation Social and Cultural
             History. Kingston, Jamaica: University Press of the West Indies.
Brito, Nadia F.                                                             .                   bs
1989         Merchants of Curacao in the early 18th century. [Master’s thesis, the College of William
             and Mary.] Williamsburg, VA: [s.n.].


                                                                                                  269
Broek, Aart Gideon
1988           ‘Cuenta Popular. Over Antilliaanse spinvertellingen’ Volkscultuur 5(3): 7-29.
1990           The Rise ofaCaribbean Island’s Literature. The Case of Curacao and its Writing in Papt-
               amentu. [PhD thesis, Free University of Amsterdam. ] Alblasserdam: Haveka.
1992           ‘The Literary Canonization of the Papiamentu Oral Tradition. Defining Concepts; in: E.
               Ayubi (ed.), Papers of the Third Seminar on Latin-American and Caribbean Folklore, p.
               83-93, Curacao: AAINA. Reports of the Archaeological-Anthropological Institute of the
               Netherlands Antilles (AAINA), No. 12.
1993           Mondeling overgeleverde teksten in het Papiamentu: omtrent de herwaardering van een
               eeuwenoude traditie. Curacao: Fundashon Pierre Lauffer
1995           ‘From an Oral Tradition to an Oral Literature. Vicissitudes of Texts in Papiamentu
                (Aruba, Bonaire and Curacao)’, Journal of Caribbean Studies 10(3): 261-82.
Burke, Peter
1978           Popular Culture in Early Modern Europe. New York: New York University Press.
1980           Sociology and History. London [etc]: Allen & Unwin.
1991           ‘Overture. The New History, its Past and its Future’ in: Peter Burke (ed.) New Perspecti-
               ves on Historical Writing, p.1-23. Cambridge: Polity Press.
1992           History and Social Theory. Cambridge: Polity Press.
1996           ‘Historical Anthropology’, in: Don Kalb, et al. (eds), Historical Anthropology. The
               Unwaged Debate, p. 49-58. Utrecht: Stichting Focaal.
Burke, Peter (ed.)
1991           New Perspectives on Historical Writing. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Burton, Richard D.E.
1997           Afro-Creole. Power, Opposition and Play in the Caribbean. Ithaca, New York: Cornell
               University Press.
1999           ‘Names and Naming in Afro-Caribbean Cultures, Nieuwe West-Indische Gids 73(1): 35-
             58.
Cameron, Norman
1934         The Evolution of the Negro. Georgetown: Argosy Co.
Cappelle, H. van
1901         Bijdrage tot de kennis der cultures in Suriname. Amsterdam: J.H. de Bussy
1926         Mythen en sagen uit West-Indié. Zutphen: W.J. Thieme & Cie.
Catalogus
1913         Catalogus van de afdeeling koloniën Oost- en West-Indië van de tentoonstelling ‘De Vrouw
             1813-1913, Amsterdam, May-October 1913. Groningen: Romelingh & Co.
Certeau, Michel de
1984         The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley, CA [etc]: University of California Press.
Clarke, Edith
WO              My Mother Who Fathered Me. A Study of the Family in Three Selected Communities in
            Jamaica. London: Allen & Unwin.
Clemencia, Joceline
1996            ‘Katalina Beleku. A View on Curacaoan Feminine Folklore’, in: E. Ayubi (ed.), Papers of
                the Third Seminar on Latin-American and Caribbean Folklore, p. 83-93. Curacao:
                AAINA. Reports of the Archaeological-Anthropological Institute of the Netherlands
                Antilles (AAINA), No. 12.
2004       Elis Juliana Inbestigadó. Piedra di Mulina. Curacao: Museo Nashonal di Arkeologia i
           Antropologia (NAAM).
Cohen Henriquez, P. and D.C. Hesseling
1935       ‘Papiamentse en Negerengelse spreekwoorden’, West-Indische Gids 17: 161-172
1936-1937 ‘Nog enige Papiamentse spreekwoorden? West-Indische Gids 18(19): 82-4.
Comaroff, Jean and John Comaroff




270
 199]        Of Revelation and Revolution. Christianity, Colonialism and Consciousness in South
            Africa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Coomans, Henny E., Maritza Coomans-Eustatia and Johan van ’t Leven
1999         Veranderend Curacao. Collectie essays opgedragen aan Lionel Capriles ter gelegenheid van
            zijn 45-jarig jubileum bij de Maduro & Curiel’s Bank N.V. Bloemendaal: Stichting Libri
             Antilliani.
Cooper, Frederick, Thomas C. Holt, Rebecca J. Scott
2000        Beyond Slavery. Explorations of Race, Labor, and Citizenship in Postemancipation Socie-
             ties. Chapel Hill [etc]: University of North Carolina Press.
Courlander, Harold
1939        Haiti Singing. Chapel Hill [etc]: University of North Carolina Press. [Reprinted New
            York: Cooper Square 1973]
1960         The Drum and the Hoe. Life and Lore of the Haitian People. Berkeley: University of Cal-
            ifornia Press.
1963        Negro Folk Music, U.S.A. New York: Columbia University Press.
Cuales, Sonia
1980         ‘Women, Reproduction and Foreign Capital in Curacao), Caraïbisch Forum 1(2): 75-86.
Cuenta di Nansi
1899        ‘Cuenta di nansi: Curacaose sprookjes’, Jaarlijksch verslag van het Geschied-, Taal-, Land-
            en Volkenkundig Genootschap, p. 94-119. Amsterdam: J.H. de Bussy.
Curacaosche Courant
1816-            De Curacaosche Courant. [Willemstad]: William Lee
Dahlhaus, G.J.M.
1924             Monseigneur Martinus Joannes Niewindt, eerste Apostolisch Vicaris van Curacao. Een
                 levensschets, 27 augustus 1824-12 januari 1860. Baasrode: Bracke-van Geest.
Darnton, Robert
1984             The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French Cultural History. New York: Basic
                 Books.
Dekker, Jeroen H.
1982        Curacao zonder/met Shell. Een bijdrage tot bestudering van demografische, economische en
            sociale processen in de periode 1900-1929. Zutphen: De Walburg Pers.
Dennert, Henk
1968a       ‘De Nanzi-verhalen’, Schakels NA 53:30-2.
1968b       “Het oude Curacaose Luango-verhaal’, Schakels NA 53: 27-9.
Dissel, S. van
1857             Curacao: herinneringen en schetsen. Leiden: Sythoff.
Dissel, J.S van
1868       ‘Enige opmerkingen omtrent den stoffelijken toestand van het eiland Curacao’, Bijdra-
           gen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 15: 436-69.
Domínguez, Virginia R.
2000       ‘For a Politics of Love and Rescue’, Cultural Anthropology 15(3): 361-93.
Dorson, Richard M. (ed.)
ICS)             African Folklore. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
1983             ‘A Historical Theory for American Folklore’, in: Richard M. Dorson (ed.), Handbook of
                 American Folklore, p.326-337. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Drescher, Seymour                                                                                 oe
1995             ‘The Long Good-bye. Dutch Capitalism and Antislavery in Comparative Perspective, in:
                 Gert J. Oostindie (ed.), Fifty Years later. Antislavery, Capitalism and Modernity in the
                 Dutch Orbit, p. 25-67. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Droog, Jan
1975          Biba Nanzi! DI.1. Serie volksverhalen uit de Nederlandse Antillen vanuit het Papiaments
                 naverteld. Aruba: De Wit.


                                                                                                     DA
Dundes, Alan
1965        The study offolklore. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Duyfjes, G.
1914        ‘De watervoorziening van de Benedenwindsche eilanden van de kolonie Curacao, De
              Ingenieur 29 (2): 225-8.
Elkins, Stanley
1959          Slavery. A Problem in American Institutional and Intellectual Life. Chicago: University of
              Chicago Press.
Engerman, S.L.
1992          ‘The Economic Response to Emancipation and Some Economic Aspects of the Mean-
              ing of Freedom, in: Frank McGlynn and Seymour Drescher (eds), The Meaning of Free-
              dom. Economics, Politics, and Culture after Slavery, p. 49-68. Pittsburgh, PA: University
              of Pittsburgh Press.
Engerman, Stanley and Eugene D. Genovese (eds.)
1974          Race and Slavery in the Western Hemisphere: Quantitative Studies. Princeton, N.J.:
              Princeton University Press.
Eudell, Demetrius L.
2002          The Political Languages of Emancipation in the British Caribbean and the U.S. South.
              Chapel Hill [etc]: University of North Carolina Press.
Euwens, P.A.
1906          ‘Het beschavingwerk op Curacao’, Neerlandia, 10 (1906): p. 45-48, 87-88, 126-128.
1932          ‘Barber. De oudste buitenparochie van Curacao, 1832-1932), Koloniaal Misste Tijdschrift
             15:122-6; 145-52; 225-34.
Evans-Pritchard, E.
1961          Anthropology and History. A lecture delivered in the University ofManchester with the sup-
              port of the Simon Fund for the Social Sciences. Manchester: Manchester U.P.
Fabre, Geneviève and Robert O’Meally (eds)
1994           History and Memory in African-American Culture. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fentress, James and Chris Wickham
1992           Social Memory. New Perspectives on the Past. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
li eke ENG:
1969           ‘Het reglement op de inrichting en de samenstelling van de rechterlijke macht. De
               geboorte en het bewogen leven van een honderdjarige) in: J.A. Schiltkamp, P.V. Sjiem Fat
               and M.R. Wijnholt (eds), Honderd jaar codificatie in de Nederlandse Antillen, p. 7-51.
               Arnhem: Uitgeversmaatschappij S. Gouda Quint/D. Brouwer en Zoon.
Foner, Eric
1983           Nothing but freedom. Emancipation and its legacy. Baton Rouge [etc.]: Louisiana State
               University.
Fortanier, A.P.
1869          Geschiedenis van het ontstaan en de ontwikkeling der Nederlandsche koloniën. Amster-
             dam: G.L. Funke.
Frazier, Edward Franklin
1946          The Negro Family in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Freyre, Gilberto
1946          The Masters and the Slaves. A Study in the Development of Brazilian Civilization (transl.
              S. Putnam). New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Froude, James Anthony
1889          The English in the West Indies or the Bow of Ulysses. London: Longmans, Green.
Frykman, Birgitta
1996        ‘Historical Anthropology, in: Don Kalb, Hans Marks and Herman Tak (eds), Historical
               Anthropology. The Unwaged Debate, p. 25-31. Utrecht: Stichting Focaal.



LD
Furnivall, J.S.
1948        Colonial Policy and Practice. A Comparative Study of Burma and Netherlands India. Was-
            hington: New York University Press.
Gaay Fortman, B. de
1934        ‘Review of ‘Algun pagina tuma foi historia di Curacao by W. Hoyer), West Indische Gids,
              16(1934):127.
1947          Schets van de politieke geschiedenis der Nederlandsche Antillen (Curacao) in de twintigste
              eeuw. ’s-Gravenhage: W. van Hoeve.
1948          Aantekeningen omtrent een verblijfop Curacao in 1825 en 1826. Sl: s.n.
1950          Algemeene bepalingen der wetgeving van de kolonie Curacao. Burgerlijk Wetboek voor de
              kolonie Curacao. Bepalingen op den overgang van de vroegere tot de nieuwe wetgeving in
              de kolonie Curacao. Reglement op het notarisambt in de kolonie Curacao. Second edition.
              ’s-Gravenhage: Staatsdrukkerij- en Uitgeverijbedrijf. [First edition 1932].
1953          ‘Het stoffelijk overschot van de heer N. van Meeteren onder grote belangstelling ten
              grave gedragen) Beurs en Nieuwsberichten, 13 -5-1953.
Gaspar, David Barry and Darlene Clark Hine (eds)
1996          More Than Chattel. Black Women and Slavery in the Americas. Bloomington: Indiana
              University Press.
Geerdink-Jesurun Pinto, Nilda M.
1952         Cuentanan di Nanzi. Curacao: Paulus-Drukkerij
KO          Nanzi stories: Curacao folklore. [Translated from the Papiamentu by Richard E. Wood.]
             Curagao: Stichting Wetenschappelijke Bibliotheek.
Gehring, Ch.T.
1987         Curacao Papers, 1640-1655. [Transl. and ed. by Charles T. Gehring; transcr. and ed. by
            J.A. Schiltkamp.] Interlaken, NY: Hearth of the Lakes Publishing.
Genovese, Eugene D.
1974          Roll, Jordan, Roll. The World the Slaves Made. New York: Pantheon Books.
Gijlswijk, B.A.J.
1922          ‘De huwelijksvorm der burgerlijke wetgeving in de kolonie Curagao), Onze Missién in
              Oost- en West-Indié 5(4): 202-28.
Gilroy, Paul
1993         The Black Atlantic. Modernity and Double Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
            University Press.
Ginzburg, Carlo
1980        The Cheese and the Worms. The Cosmos of a Sixteenth-Century Miller. (Transl. by John
            and Anne Tedeschi] London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Glassie, Henry
1983          ‘Folkloristic Study of the American Artifact. Objects and Objectives, in: Richard M.
              Dorson (ed.), Handbook of American Folklore, p. 376-83. Bloomington: Indiana Univer-
              sity Press.
Gon Netscher, van der A.
1868        ‘Korte beschrijving der Nederlandsche West-Indische kolonién [t.w. de eilanden] [en]
            bijzonderheden omtrent de opheffing der slavernij’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en
            Volkenkunde 15(1868): 487-534.
Gordon, Shirley C.
1996        God Almighty Make Me Free. Christianity in Pre-Emancipation Jamaica. Bloomington
            [etc]: Indiana University Press.
Goslinga, Cornelis Ch.                                                                          ;
1956         Emancipatie en emancipator. De geschiedenis van de slavernij op de Benedenwindse eilan-
             den en van het werk der bevrijding. Assen: Van Gorcum. [PhD thesis, University of
             Nijmegen. ]



                                                                                                    DS)
1971             The Dutch in the Caribbean and on the Wild Coast, 1580-1680. Assen: Van Gorcum.
Grol, G.J. van
1934          De grondpolitiek in het West-Indische domein der Generaliteit. Een historische studie. (3
              vols). ’s-Gravenhage: Rijksuitgeverijdienst van de Nederlandsche Staatscourant. [Fac-
              simile reprint Amsterdam: Emmering 1980.]
Gutman, Herbert
1976          The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 1750-1925. New York: Pantheon Books.
Gyekye, Kwame
1987          An Essay on African Philosophical Thought. The Akan Conceptual Scheme. Cambridge:
              Cambridge University Press.
Hall, David
1984          ‘Introduction’, in: Steven L. Kaplan (ed.), Understanding Popular Culture. Europe from
              the Middle Ages to the Nineteenth Century, p. 5-18. Ithaca, NY [etc]: Cornell University
              Press.
Hall, Neville A.T.
1985          ‘Maritime Maroons. Grand Marronage from the Danish West Indies, William and Mary
                 Quarterly, Third Series, XLI(4): 476-98.
Hamelberg, J.H.J.
1895a      Antiquarische denkbeelden buiten “antiquiteiten”   [in antwoord op de brochure van den
            heer A.M. Chumaceiro: Zal het kiesrecht Curacao tot kannibalisme voeren?]. Curacao: s.n.
1895b       ‘Prof. J.A. Froude en Anthony Trollope over het kiesrecht in West-Indié, Vragen van den
            dag. Maandschrift voor Nederland en kolonién 10: 337-54.
1896       De tot in 1818 op Curacao bestaan hebbende belastingen. Curagao: s.n.
1901-1903a De Nederlanders op de West-Indische eilanden. I. De benedenwindsche eilanden: Curacao,
                 Bonaire, Aruba — 1901. II. De bovenwindsche eilanden: St. Eustatius, Saba, St. Martin —
             1903. Bijdrage tot de jaarverslagen van het Geschied-, Taal-, Land- en Volkenkundig
             Genootschap der Nederlandsche Antillen. Amsterdam: De Bussy. [Facsimile reprint
              1979 Amsterdam: Emmering. |
1901-1903b Documenten behoorende bij ‘De Nederlanders op de West-Indische eilanden’ (2 vols). I.
             Curacao, Bonaire, Aruba — 1901. II. St. Eustatius, Saba, St. Martin — 1903. Amsterdam:
             De Bussy.
1903          "Un época muchoe trastorná. Ocho anja foi historia di Curacao 1796-1804., in: Apuntenan
             historico di Colonia Curagao, p.5-75. Curacao: Imprenta di Vicariato.
Hannerz, Ulf
1992         Cultural Complexity. Studies in the Social Organization of Meaning. New York: Columbia
             University Press.
Hardung, Christine
2002         ‘Everyday Life of Slaves in Northern Dahomey. The Process of Remembering’, Journal of
             African Cultural Studies 15(1): 35-44.
Hartog, Johan
1961          Curagao van kolonie tot autonomie. I. Tot 1816. II. Na 1816. Aruba: De Wit.
1973          Tula. Verlangen naar vrijheid. Curacao: Eilandsbestuur van Curacao.
Haviser, Jay B.
1987         Amerindian Cultural Geography on Curagao. [PhD thesis, University of Leiden.]
1997          Social Repercussions of Slavery as Evident in African-Curacaoan ‘Kunukw Houses. Paper
             presented at the Conference ‘West Africa and the Americas. Repercussions of the Slave
                 Trade’, University of the West Indies, Mona, Jamaica, 20-22 February 1997.
Haviser, Jay and Christopher DeCorse
1991         ‘African-Caribbean interaction: a research plan for Curacao Creole culture’, in: E‚N.
             Ayubi and J.B. Haviser (eds). Proceedings of the thirteenth international congress for
             Caribbean archaelogy, p. 326-337. Willemstad: Institute of Archaeology and Anthropol-
             ogy of the Netherlands Antilles (AAINA).


274
Haviser, Jay B. (ed.)
 1999         African Sites Archaeology in the Caribbean. Princeton, NJ: Markus
Wiener; Kingston, Jamaica: Ian Randle Publishers.
 L999         ‘Identifying a Post-Emancipation (1863-1940) African-Curacaoan Material Culture
              Assemblage’ in: Jay Haviser (ed.) African Sites Archaeology in the Caribbean, p. 221-263.
              Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener; Kingston, Jamaica: Ian Randle Publishers.
2001          Emancipation as a Continuing Process. Houston, Texas: African Studies Association
              Annual General Meeting.
Haviser, Jay B. and ED. Boi’ Antoin
              ‘Observations Relating to Vernacular Architectural Diversity Between Curacao and
              Bonaire), Kristof 12(4): 17-33.
Hendrikse-Rigaud, Renée
1994        2000 proverbio 1 ekspreshon = 2000 spreekwoorden en gezegden = 2000 proverbs. Curacao:
            s.n.
Hendry, Joy
1999        An introduction to social anthropology. Other people's worlds. New York: Palgrave.
Henke, Holger
2004        Suggestions  for the Development of a Theory of Everyday Life in the Caribbean. Paper pre-
            sented at the 28th Annual Conference of the Caribbean Studies Association, Belize City,
            Belize, 26 May-31 May 2004.
Henriques, Fernando
158         Family and colour in Jamaica. London: Eyre & Spottiswoode
Henriquez, E.C.
1969          ‘Familiegronden (tera di famia) en oude fideicommissen (filocommis) op het eiland
              Curagao, in: J.A. Schiltkamp, P.V. Sjiem Fat and M.R. Wijnholt (eds), Honderd jaar cod-
              ificatie in de Nederlandse Antillen, p. 81-103. Arnhem: Uitgeversmaatschappij S. Gouda
              Quint/D. Brouwer en Zoon.
Henriquez, J.
1991        From the Womb. Curagaoan Women Speak about Their Identity. [Master's thesis, George
            Washington University. ]
2002        Korsou su muhénan pionero: original na papiamento. Willemstad: Archivo Nashonal di
            Antia Hulandes
2006        ‘Forsa di un nashon ta depende di forsa di su famianan, in: Mayra van der Dijs (ed.),
            René Römer als inspirator. Actualisering van zijn gedachtegoed, p. 42-59. Curacao: Uni-
            versity of the Netherlands Antilles.
Henriquez, May
ca. 1981    Yaya ta konta. Kuenta piki aki ku aya. Curagao: s.n.
Herskovits, Melville J.
1941          The Myth of the Negro Past. Boston: Beacon Press [Reprinted in 1958.)
1947          Trinidad Village. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Herskovits, Melville J. and Frances Herskovits
1934          Rebel Destiny. Among the Bush Negroes of Dutch Guiana. New York: Whittlesey House
            [etc].
Higman, B.W.
1985-1986 ‘Theory, Method and Technique in Caribbean Social History, Journal of Caribbean Hist-
           ory 2(1985-86): 1-29.
1995       ‘Post-Emancipation Historiography of the Leeward Islands’ in: Karen Olwig Fog (ed.),
           Small Islands, Large Questions. Society, Culture and Resistance in the Post-Emancipation
              Caribbean, p. 8-28. London: Frank Cass & Co; Rotterdam: Bureau Studium Generale,
            Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam.
Hoefnagels, P. and W. Hoogenbergen                                            .
1980        Antilliaans spreekwoor denboek. [Verzameld , verklaard en betekenis gegeven door Peter


                                                                                                   275
            Hoefnagels en Shon W. Hoogenbergen, met illustraties en adviezen van Elis Juliana
            1980.] Curacao, N.A.: De Curagaosche Courant.
1985        Buki   di proverbionan antiano/Antilliaans spreekwoordenboek. [Met illustraties van Elis
            Juliana.] Curacao: De Curagaosche Courant.
1991        Antilliaans spreekwoordenboek. Spreekwoorden en zegswijzen. Amsterdam: Thomas Rap.
Hoetink, Harry
1958        Het patroon van de oude Curagaose samenleving. Een sociologische studie. Assen: Van Gor-
            cum. [Reprinted in 1987, Amsterdam: Emmering]
1962        De gespleten samenleving in het Caribisch gebied. Bijdrage tot de sociologie der rasrelaties
            in gesegmenteerde maatschappijen. Assen: Van Gorcum.
1967        The Two Variants in Caribbean Race Reletions. A Contribution to the Sociology of Seg-
            mented Societies. (Transl. Eva M. Hooykaas.) London: Institute of Race Relations.
1982        The Dominican People 1850-1900. Notes for a Historical Sociology. Baltimore [etc.]: Johns
            Hopkins University Press.
1989        ‘Creoolse cultuur’) in: Michiel Baud (ed.), Cultuur in beweging. Creolisering en Afro-
            Caraibische cultuur, p. 17-26. Rotterdam: Bureau Studium Generale, Erasmus Univer-
            siteit Rotterdam.
Horton, Robin and Ruth Finnegan
1073             Modes of Thought. Essays on Thinking in Western and Non-Western Societies. London:
                 Faber and Faber.
Hoyer, W.
IOs         Algun pagina tuma foi historia di Curacao. Curacao: Scherpenheuvel.
WOS         Bolivar i Brion, conferencia dicta pa senor Hoyer. Curacao in 1830. Curagao: s.n.
1941        Historia di Curacao. Curacao: Bethencourt.
Huen, P. Lim Pui (ed.)
1998        Oral History in Southeast Asia, Theory and Method. Singapore: Institute of Southeast
            Asian Studies.
Huender
1993        Un spil di presente i un porta pa futuro: geschiedbeleving en nationale identiteit op
            Curagao. [Master’s thesis, University of Leiden.|
Irus, Reman
1910        Onze West I. De kolonie Suriname. Onze West II. De kolonie Curacao. ’s-Gravenhage:
                 Vereeniging ‘Oost en West, Commissie tot verspreiding van populaire kennis omtrent
                 Nederlandsch Oost- en West-Indië.
Jarvis, J.
1944             The Virigin Islands and their People. Philadelphia: Dorrance and Co.
Jekyll, Walter
1907             Jamaica Song and Story. London: David Nutt.
Jong, Janny de, Gé Prince en Hugo s’Jacob
1998             Niet-westerse geschiedenis. Benadering en thema’s. Assen: Van Gorcum.
Jordaan, Han
1999             ‘De veranderde situatie op de Curacaose slavenmarkt en de mislukte slavenopstand op
                 de plantage Santa Maria in 1716, in: Henny E. Coomans, Maritza Coomans-Eustatia
                 and Johan van ’t Leven (eds), Veranderend Curacao. Collectie essays opgedragen aan
                 Lionel Capriles ter gelegenheid van zijn 45-jarig jubileum bij de Maduro and Curiel’s Bank
                 N.V, p. 473-501. Bloemendaal: Stichting Libri Antilliani.
Joubert E.L.
1983         ‘Het concubinaat in het Antilliaanse Recht’, in: W. Breemhaar en T.R.Hidma              (eds),
                 Samenleven samenwerken. Opstellen aangeboden aan Prof. Mr. E.C. Henriquez ter gele-
                 genheid van zijn viifenzestigste verjaardag, p.183-190. Deventer: Kluwer.
Juliana, Elis
1963             Proverbio. Curagao: Boekhandel St. Augustinus.


276
1969           Volkskunde van Curacao. Curacao: Scherpenheuvel.
1970           Echa cuenta. Amsterdam: De Bezige Bij.
IDs            ‘Wega di palu i sanger pa tambú’, Kristof2,5: 214-21.
1976           Guia etnologiko I. Muzik di Zumbi. Curacao: Scherpenheuvel.
1977a          ‘Dri Djo, Kristof3:221-8.
1977b          Guia etnologiko II. Kulto di morto. Curacao: Scherpenheuvel.
1978           Guia etnologiko III. Weganan di antes. Curacao: Scherpenheuvel.
1980a          ‘Nanzi, su origen i su influensia riba desaroyo di nos komunidat’, Kristof5:4-17.
1980b          ‘Zamanakitoki’, Kristof, 5, 6: 20-23
1983a          ‘Origen di baile di tambú na Kòrsou’, Kristof 6,4: 5-22
1983b          ‘Katibu ta galina) Kristof 6,4 (1983): 25-9.
1988           Matrimonio i parto. Curacao: AAINA. Reports of the Archaeological-Anthropological
            Institute of the Netherlands Antilles (AAINA), No. 5.
Kakebeeke, 1.G.J.
1912         Rapport omtrent den landbouw op Curacao. s-Gravenhage: Algemene Landsdrukkerij.
Kaplan, Steven L. (ed.)
1984         Understanding Popular Culture. Europe from the Middle Ages to the Nineteenth Century.
             Ithaca, NY [etc]: Cornell University Press.
Katholieke Illustratie
1883           De Katholieke Illustratie. Zondags-lektuur voor het Katholieke Nederlandse Volk.[De
             Katholieke Illustratie, 1867-1967.) ’s-Hertogenbosch [etc]: Administratie van De Katho-
             lieke Illustratie.
Kerkelijke Courant
1857-1874 Katholieke Nederlandsche Stemmen over Godsdienst, Staat-, Geschied- en Letterkunde.
               Kerkelijke Courant. Arnhem: s.n. Kerstgeschenk
1883           ‘Een kerstgeschenk voor de arme negers van San Willibrordo’, De Katholieke Illustratie.
               Zondags-lektuur voor het Katholieke Nederlandse Volk, vol. 17(1883):      147-150;166-
               67;174-75.
Klooster, Hugo Andreas Jozef
1985         Indonesiërs schrijven hun geschiedenis. De ontwikkeling van de Indonesische geschiedbeoe-
            fening in theorie en praktijk, 1900-1980. Dordrecht [etc]: Foris. [PhD thesis, University
               of Leiden. }
Klooster, W.
1994         ‘Subordinate but Proud. Curagao’s Free Blacks and Mulattoes in the Eighteenth Centu-
               ry, Nieuwe West-Indische Gids 68(3-4): 283-300.
1999           ‘Van zoutwaterslaven tot creolen. Curagao’s zwarten en mulatten ten tijde van de West-
               Indische Compagnie’, in: Henny E. Coomans, Maritza Coomans-Eustatia and Johan van
               t Leven (eds), Veranderend Curacao. Collectie essays opgedragen aan Lionel Capriles ter
               gelegenheid van zijn 45-jarig jubileum bij de Maduro and Curiel’s Bank N.V., p. 505-15.
               Bloemendaal: Stichting Libri Antilliani.
Knappert, L.
1932         Geschiedenis van de Nederlandsche Bovenwindsche Eilanden in de 18de Eeuw. ‘s-Graven-
             hage: Nijhoff.
Kol, H.H. van
1901           Een noodlijdende kolonie. Amsterdam [etc.]: Masereeuw & Bouten.
1904           Naar de Antillen en Venezuela. Leiden: Sijthoif.
Kontenido
1974           Kontenido di Zikinzá. Curagao, s.n.
Koot, W.
1979           Emigratie op de Nederlandse Antillen:een sociaal-wetenschappelijk onderzoek naar
               omvang en achtergronden van de emigratie, in het bijzonder op Aruba en Curagao. [PhD
               thesis, University of Leiden.].

                                                                                                   Dd
Kopytoff, Barbara                                                                         At
1987         ‘Religious Change Among Jamaican Maroons. The Ascendance of the Christian God
             Within a Traditional Cosmology’ Journal of Social History 20 (1987): 463-85.
Krugers, B.                                                               a          ;
1907          ‘Wapa coe meiloo, Lectuur voor de Leden van den Sint Dominicus-Penning 18: 8-9.
1934          ‘De eerste volkstelling op Curacao) Lectuur voor de leden van den Sint Dominicus-Pen-
              ning 111: 55-9.
Kunst, A.J.M.
1981          Recht, commercie en kolonialisme in West-Indié vanaf de zestiende tot in de negentiende
              eeuw. Zutphen: De Walburg Pers.
La Cruz
1900          La Cruz. Semanario Religioso Católico i di Interés General. Willemstad: Apostolisch Vic-
              ariaat [etc].
La Union
1889          La Union. Willemstad: Vinck [Job Printing Office].
1891          La Union, 27-5-1891. Willemstad: Vinck [Job Printing Office].
Ladurie, LeRoy Emmanuel
1975          Montaillou. Village occitan de 1294 a 1324. Paris: Gallimard.
Lampe, A.
              Yo te nombro libertad. Iglesia y Estado en la sociedad esclavista de Curazao (1816-1863).
              [PhD thesis, Free University of Amsterdam. |
1998          ‘Review of the Book Gert Oostindie (ed.), Fifty Years later. Antislavery, Capitalism and
              Modernity in the Dutch Orbit? Leiden: KITLV Press, 1995), Revista Mexicana del Caribe
              6: 267-70.
1991          ‘De vestiging van een Katholiek regime op Curacao (1824-1860), in: A. Lampe (ed.),
              Kerk en Maatschappij op Curacao, p. 13-60. Curacao: Sentro Kateketico.
2001          ‘Christianity and slavery in the Dutch Caribbean’ in: Armando Lampe (ed.) Christian-
              ity in the Caribbean: essays on church history, p. 126-153.Barbados [etc.]: University of
              the West Indies Press.
Lamur, H.E.
1981          ‘Demographic Performances of Two Slave Populations of the Dutch Speaking Carib-
            bean) Boletin de Estudios Latino Americanos y del Caribe 38(1981):87-102.
Langenfeld, Els
2001la        Project Porto Mari [Manuscript]. [History Project under the Assignment of Plantation
              Porto Mari, Curagao.] Curagao: s.n.
2001b         ‘Vincent Jansen. Father of the Poor’, Plantages Porto Mari, 2001:2.
2005          ‘Heideboeketjes voor Curagao) Algemeen Dagblad, 13-6- 2005.
Lantèrnu
2003          ‘1 Juli: Een heugelijke dag? 1 juli 1863-1 juli 2003, Lantèrnu, no. 22. [Gedenkboek 140
              jaar emancipatie. |Curacao: Nationaal Archief.
Latour, M.D.
1936         ‘Familienamen op Curacao), West-Indische Gids 19: 195-9.
1937-1940 Cuenta di Nanzi [naverteld in het Nederlands] door M.D. Latour, in: De West-Indische
              Gids, jg. 19 (1937); p. 33-43; jg. 20 (1938); p. 9-18, 103-108, 143-147, 296-305; jg. 22
              (1940); p. 47-52, 86-91, 134-140.
1940          Un pionero di Curagao. Pastoor Vicente Jansen 1890-1940. Curacao: Imprenta La Cruz.
              [Mi Biblioteca Papiamento. ]
1945          Geschiedenis der missie van Curagao door enkele Paters Dominicanen. SL: Provinciaal
              Vicariaat der Paters Dominicanen op Curacao.
1948a         ‘Boekbespreking Nicolaas van Meeteren. Volkskunde van Curacao, West-Indische Gids
              29(1948): 307-9.



278
 1948b         ‘Bookreview J. Antonio Jarvis. The Virgin Islands and Their People’, West-Indische Gids
               30 (1948): 236-40.
 1949         ‘Voodoo op Curacao; Indisch missie-tijdschrift, jg. 32 (1949); p. 18-21.
 1950         Sausemangelen. Vijftig jaar geleden. Curacao: s.n.
 1952-1955    Geschiedenis van de R.K. Missie op de Nederlandse Antillen vanaf 1870. Willemstad,
              Curagao: [s.n.].                                                      .
1953          ‘Shon Poppi’ ontpopt zich als torenuren-expert. Nicolaas van Meeteren een veelzijdige
              man) Amigoe, 11-5-1953.
Lauffer, Pierre
1971          Di nos. Antologia di nos literatura. Curacao: Boekhandel Salas.
Lee, T. van der
              Curagaose vrijbrieven, 1722-1863. Met indices op namen van vrijgelatenen en hun voor-
              malige eigenaren: Den Haag: Nationaal Archief.
Levine, Lawrence
1977          Black Culture and Black Consciousness. Afro-American Folk Thought from Slavery to Free-
              dom. Oxford: Oxford University Press. [Reprinted in 1978].
1983           ‘How to Interpret American Folklore Historically’, in: Richard M. Dorson (ed.), Hand-
               book of American Folklore, p. 338-44. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Lewin, Olive
1984           ‘Emancipation Songs and Festivities, Jamaica Journal 17(3): 18-23.
Lewis, Herbert S.
1998         ‘The Misrepresentation of Anthropology and its Consequences’, American Anthropolo-
              gist 100(3): 716-31.
Lier, R.A.J. van
1951           ‘De sociale wetenschappen van de neger), Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde
               van Nederlandsch-Indië 107:279-303.
WS             Samenleving in een grensgebied. Een sociaal-historische studie van Suriname. Amsterdam:
               Emmering. [First edition 1949.|
1953-1954      Cultuurconflict in de heterogene samenleving. Sociologisch jaarboek, deel 8. Leiden: E.J.
               Brill.
Lomax, Alan and Joan Halifax
1971           ‘Folk Songs Texts as Culture Indicators’, in: Pierre Maranda and Elli Köngäs Maranda
               (eds), Structural Analysis of Oral Tradition, p. 235-67. Philadelphia: University of Penn-
               sylvania Press.
Maduro, Antoine J.
1959           Un coto di dicho, refran, proverbio i expresionnan Papiamentu i nan nificacion na Ulandés.
               Curagao: s.n.
1960           Loque a sobra den e macutu di dicho, refran, proverbio, frase i palabranan di nos lenga 1
               nan nificacion na Ulandes. Curacao: Ciro J. Cardoze.
1961           ‘Papiamentu: comentario riba Sambumbu [di Brenneker]’, Amigoe, 15 november.
1967           Proverbio-, refran-, dicho-, i expreshonnan Papiamentu i nan nificashon na Ulandés.
               Curagao: s.n.
1969           Proverbio-, refran-, dicho-, i expreshonnan Papiamentu i nan nificashon na Ulandés [2nd
               ed. (mehorá i owmenta)] Curacao: s.n.
Marcha, Valdemar and Paul Verweel
2003           De cultuur van angst: paradoxale ketenen van angst en zwijgen op Curacao. Amsterdam:
               SWP.
Mark, van der, Eva
1999           Verlossing onder een religieus regiem: ontwikkelingen in de zorg voor moeder en kind
               op Curacao, in: Rineke Marjon van Daalen, Maria Frederika Gijswijt-Hofstra (eds),
               Gezond en wel: vrouwen en de zorg voor gezondheid in de twintigste eeuw, p. 213-231.
               Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.

                                                                                                      PBS)
Marks, A.E.
1975           Man, vrouw en huishoudgroep. De Afro-Amerikaanse familie in de samenleving van
               Curacao. [PhD thesis, University of Leiden. |
                                                                                            eee
Marshall, W.
1993        ‘We Be Wise to Many More Tings. Blacks’ Hopes and Expectations of Emancipation, in:
            Hillary Beckles and Verena Shepherd (eds), Caribbean Freedom. Economy and Society
            from Emancipation to the Present. A Student Reader, p. 12-20. Kingston, Jamaica: Ian
            Randle Publishers.
Martinus, Frank
1997        The Kiss ofaSlave. Papiamentu’s West-African Connections. Curacao: De Curagaose Cou-
               rant, [PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam,     1996. |
Maza, Sarah
1996        ‘Stories in History. Cultural Narratives in Recent Works in European History, American
               Historical Review 101(5): 1493-515.
McDaniel, L.
1990           ‘The Flying Africans. Extent and Strength of the Myth in the Americas, Nieuwe West-
               Indische Gids 64(1-2): 28-40.
McGlynn, Frank and Seymour Drescher (eds)
1992       The Meaning of Freedom. Economics, Politics, and Culture after Slavery. Pittsburgh: Uni-
           versity of Pittsburgh Press.
Meeteren, N. van                                                                                   :
1944           Noodlotsdagen. Grepen uit de geschiedenis van Curacao, 1799-1800. Amsterdam:
               Dupont/Willemstad: De Stad.
1947           Volkskunde van Curacao. Curacao: Scherpenheuvel. [Reprinted in 1977, Amsterdam:
               Emmering. |
1950           Manuel Carel Piar. De tragedie van Angostura: Uittreksel. Curacao: s.n.
zijn           Tijdrekenkundig overzicht van de geschiedenis van de Curacaosche eilanden Curacao,
               Aruba, Bonaire met opgave van de voornaamste bronnen. Sl: s.n.
Menkman, W.R.
1935           ‘Sprokkelingen op het terrein der geschiedenis van de Nederlandse Antillen), West-Indis-
               che Gids 17: 65-115.
1941           ‘Aantekeningen op Hamelbergs werken), West-Indische Gids 23(24): 1-22, 33-50, 65-77,
               97-111, 161-76, 203-24.
Mintz, Sidney W.
1974        Caribbean Transformations. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Mintz, Sidney W. and Richard Price
1976        An Anthropological Approach to the Afro-American Past. A Caribbean Perspective. Phil-
               adelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues. [ISHI Occasional Papers 2]
1999           The Birth of an African-American Culture. Boston: Beacon Press.
Moreno Fraginals, Manuel
1978           El Ingenio: Complejo Econémico Social Cubano del Azúcar. La Habana: Editorial de Cien-
               cias Sociales.
Morrison, J.
1998           ‘A Global Perspective of Oral History in Southeast Asia’ in: P. Lim Pui Huen (ed.), Oral
            History in Southeast Asia, Theory and Method, p. 1-14. Singapore: Institute of Southeast
            Asian Studies.
Nagelkerke, G.A.
1973        Literatuur-overzicht van de Nederlandse Antillen vanaf de 17e eeuw tot 1970. Literatuur
            aanwezig in de bibliotheek van het Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde
            te Leiden. Leiden: KITLV, Department of Caribbean Studies.
1982        Netherlands Antilles. A Bibliography 17th century-1980. Leiden: KITLV, Department of
            Caribbean Studies.


280
Nazzari, Muriel
1996          ‘Concubinage in Colonial Brazil. The Inequalities of Race, Class and Gender’, Journal of
              Family History 21(2): 107-24.
Newton, V.
1984         The Silver Men. West Indian Labour Migration to Panama 1850-1914. Mona, Kingston:
             Institute of Social and Economic Research, University of the West Indies.
Nije-Statius van Eps
1995         Furniture from Curacao, Aruba and Bonaire: three centuries of Dutch Caribbean craft-
             manship. Zutphen: Walburg Pers.
Nooyen, R.H.
1959         Cornelis Marten y cien anja di Bonaire. Zeist: St.-Gregoriushuis.
1970         Van Bellefaas Martis tot Angel Obia. Een geschiedenis van Santa Rosa. Curacao: s.n.
1974         Tot memorie Bartholomeus Senior en Bartholomeus Senior Junior. Curacao: Zalm.
179          Het volk van de grote Manaure. De Indianen op de Gigantes-eilanden. Curacao: Montero.
HOSS         De Slavenparochie van Curacao rond het jaar 1750. Een demografie van het katholieke
             volksdeel. Curacao: AAINA. Report Archeologisch-Antropologisch Instituut Nederland-
              se Antillen (AAINA), No. 11.
Olwig, Karen Fog
1993        Global Culture, Island Identity. Continuity and Change in the Afro-Caribbean Communi-
              ty of Nevis. Amsterdam [etc]: Harwood Academic Publishers.
1995a         ‘African Cultural Principles in Caribbean Slave Societies. A View from the Danish West
              Indies; in: Stephan Palmié (ed.), Slave Cultures and the Cultures of Slavery, p. 23-39.
              Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.
1995b         ‘Introduction. Emancipation and its Consequences’ in: Karen Fog Olwig (ed.), Small
             Islands, Large Questions. Society, Culture and Resistance in the Post-Emancipation Carib-
            bean, p. 3-7. London: Frank Cass & Co.
Olwig, Karen Fog (ed.)
1995¢        Small Islands, Large Questions. Society, Culture and Resistance in the Post-Emancipation
             Caribbean. London: Frank Cass & Co.
Ong, Walter
2002        Orality and Literacy. The Technologizing of the Word. London;New York: Routledge.
Onrust, Ger Jan
1998         ‘Die blyde dag is hede aangebroken) Amigoe, Napa, 27-6-1998.
Oostindie, Gert J.
1987         ‘Historiography on the Dutch Caribbean (- 1985): Catching Up?) Journal of Caribbean
             History 21(1):1-18.
1995b        ‘Same Old Song? Perspectives on Slavery and Slavers in Suriname and Curacao), in: Gert
             J. Oostindie (ed.), Fifty Years Later. Antislavery, Capitalism and Modernity in the Dutch
             Orbit, p. 143-178. Leiden: KITLV Press.
1996         Ethnicity in the Caribbean. Essays in Honor of Harry Hoetink. London: Macmillan.
1997         Het paradijs overzee. De ‘Nederlandse’ Caraïben en Nederland. Amsterdam: Bert Bakker.
Oostindie, Gert J. (ed.)
1995a        Fifty Years Later. Antislavery, Capitalism and Modernity in the Dutch Orbit. Leiden:
             KITLV Press.
Oostindie, Gert J. and Rosemarijn Hoefte
1999         ‘Historiography of Suriname and the Netherlands Antilles’, in: B.W. Higman (ed.),
             General History of the Caribbean. Methodology and Historiography of the Caribbean, p.
             604-30. London [etc]: Unesco.
                                                                                    /
Ortiz, Fernando
1950         La Africania de la Música Folklorica de Cuba. Havanna: Cardenas y Cia.
Opi



                                                                                                  281
1891        ‘De Creool. Losse schetsen uit het West Indische volksleven’, De Katholieke. Godsdienstig
            Geschied- en Letterkundig Maandschrift 100 (12): 287-310, 353-400.
Paddenburg, van G.G.
1819        Beschrijving van het eiland Curacao en onderhoorige eilanden. Uit onderscheidene stuk-
            ken, bijdragen en opmerkingen opgemaakt. Haarlem: De erven Francois Bohn.
Palmer, R. (ed.)
1990        In search for a better life: perspectives on migation from the Caribbean. New York, NY:
             Praeger Publishers.
Panhuys, L.C.
1932-1933     ‘Folklore in Nederlandsch West-Indië), West-Indische Gids 14(15): 124-130.
1933-1934a    ‘Aanvulling folklore in Nederlandsch West-Indië’, West-Indische Gids 15(16): 16-17.
1933-1934b    ‘Folklore van Bonaire, West-Indische Gids 15(16): 97-102; 16 (17): 65-71, 318-20.
1934          ‘Folklore in Suriname’, West-Indische Gids 16(17): 17-32.
Passerini, Luisa
1987          Fascism in Popular Memory: The Cultural Experience of the Turin Working Class. Cam-
              bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Patterson, Orlando
1967          The Sociology ofSlavery. An Analysis of the Origins, Development and Structure of Negro
              Slave Society in Jamaica. London: Mac Giboob & Kee.[Reprinted in 1969 Rutherford
              [etc.]: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.|
1982          Slavery and Social Death.   A Comparative Study. London: Harvard University Press.
Paula, A.E.
1967          From Objective to Subjective Social Barriers. A Historico-philosophical Analysis of Certain
              Negative Attitudes among the Negroid Population of Curacao. Curacao: De Curagaosche
              Courant.
1973          Problemen rondom de emigratie van arbeiders uit de kolonie Curacao naar Cuba, 1917-
              1937, Curacao: Centraal Historisch Archief.
1974          1795. De slavenopstand op Curacao. [Een bronnenuitgave van de originele overheids-
              documenten. Curagao: Centraal Historisch Archief.
1992          Van slaaf tot quasi-slaaf: een sociaal-historische studie over de dubbelzinnige slaveneman-
              cipatie op Nederlands Sint Maarten, 1816-1863. [PhD thesis, University of Utrecht.
1993          ‘Vrije’ slaven. Een sociaal-historische studie over de dualistische slavenemancipatie op Ned-
              erlands Sint Maarten, 1816-1863. Zutphen: De Walburg Pers.
Paula, A.F. (ed.)
1974          1795. De slavenopstand op Curacao. Een bronnenuitgave van de originele overheidsdoc-
              umenten. Curagao: Centraal Historisch Archief.
Pencheon, Creighton
2000          ‘The Bull Play of St. Kitts. The “Cowhead” Figure in West Africa Cultural Traditions’,
              www.folkplay.info/Links/Caribbean.htm. 20-5-2005.
Perks, Robert and Alistair Thomson (eds)
1998         The Oral History Reader.
Philipps, Ann Elizabeth
1988         Labour and Migration in the Caribbean. British West Indian Domestic Servants in
             Curacao, 1940-1960. Leiden: s.n. [Master's thesis, University of Leiden.]
Pietersz, Jorge A.
1985          De Arubaanse arbeidsmigratie 1890-1930: drie studies over de trek van arbeiders in het
              Caraïbisch gebied voor de Tweede Wereldoorlog. Leiden: Caraïbische afdeling K.I.T.L.V.
Pool, John de
1935          Del Curacao que se va. Páginas arrancadas de “El libro de mis recuerdos”. Willemstad,
              Curacao: s.n. [Original edition Panama, 1934, Reprinted in 1981.]
Portelli, Alessandro
1994          ‘History-Telling and Time. An Example from Kentucky’, in: Geneviéve Fabre and Robert


282
                O’Meally (eds), History and Memory in African-American Culture, p. 164-77. New York:
                Oxford University Press.
Postma Johannes
1990            The Dutch in the Atlantic slave trade, 1600-1815. Cambridge [etc.]: Cambridge Univer-
                sity Press.
Postma, Johannes and Victor Enthoven (eds)
2003          Riches from Atlantic Commerce. Dutch Transatlantic Trade and Shipping, 1585-1817. Lei-
              den: Brill.
Price, Richard
1966          ‘Caribbean Fishing and Fishermen. A Historical Sketch’, American Anthropologist, New
              Series 68(6): 1363-83.
1983         First Time. The Historical Vision of an Afro-American People. Baltimore/London: Johns
              Hopkins University Press.
Putman, J.J.
1937-1941 ‘Brieven uit Curacao van pastoor Putman, 1837-1853), Koloniaal Missie Tijdschrift 20
                (1937): 306-14; 21 (1938): 20-30; 24 (1941): 45-57, 79-81, 106-12, 222-4.
Quintero-Rivera, Angel G.
1994         ‘The Camouflaged Drum-Melodization of Rhythms and Maroonaged Ethnicity in
                Caribbean Peasant Music’, Caribbean Quarterly 40(1): 27-37.
Rattray, Robert
1923         Ashanti. Kumasi: Basel Mission Book Depot; London: Oxford University Press.
Redfield, Robert
1941         The Folk Culture of Yucatan. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rego, Charles P. do
1995         Sklabitut i rebelion 1795, Kòrsou. Komishon di koordinashon 17 di ougùstùs, 1983.
             Curacao: Asosiashon Promoshon Konsenshi Istóriko.
Renkema, W.E.
1975            ‘W. Bloemhof. Uit het archief van een Curagaose plantage) Nieuwe West-Indische Gids
                50:27-47.
1976            ‘Anno 1869. Curacao los van Nederland?: dat nooit!!’, Kristof 3(1): 1-8.
198la           Het Curacaose plantagebedrijf in de negentiende eeuw. Zutphen: De Walburg Pers. [PhD
                thesis, Free University of Amsterdam. |
1981b           ‘Hoedenvlechterij op Curacao in de 19e eeuw’, Kristof 6(5): 13-36.
Rhone, Angela Eleanor
2000            ‘A Pedagogy of Connection Situated in a Historical Context of a Nation’s Folklores’,
                Journal of Caribbean Studies 15(3): 171-86.
Richards, Glen
1993         Order and disorder in colonial St. Kitts: the role of the armed forces in maintaining labour
             discipline, 1896-1935. Paper presented at 25th Conference of Caribbean Historians,
                U.W.L, Mona, Jamaica, March 27-April 2, 1993.
Rijkens, R.H.
1907            Verbetering van den landbouw aldaar als middel ter verheffing der kolonie. Tiel (Wage-
                ningen): Cultura, Vereeniging van Oud-leerlingen der Rijksinrichtingen van Land-,
                Tuin- en Boschbouwonderwijs te Wageningen.
                                                                                                        .
Roberts, John Storm
1998            Black Music of the Two Worlds. African, Caribbean, Latin and African-American Tradi-
                tions. New York: Schirmer Books.
Romer, A.
1984         ‘Arbeidersbeweging op Curacao’ in: H.C. Beers, et al., Opstellen ter gelegenheid van het
             100-jarig bestaan van de Kamer van Koophandel en Nijverheid te Curagao, p. 83-115.
             Curacao: Kamer van Koophandel en Nijverheid.



                                                                                                     283
Romer, René Antonio
1964          Ons samenzijn in sociologisch perspectief. Een introductie in de Curacaose samenleving.
              Curacao: Van Dorp.
1969          ‘Identidat i kultura di nos pueblo’, in: Paula, A.(ed.), Week-end di estudio, p.8-10.
              Willemstad: Centraal Historisch Archief,
1974          ‘Het “wij” van de Curagoënaar’, Kristof 1(2): p. 49-60.
1976          Korsow. Een sociologische verkenning van een Caraïbische maatschappij. Curacao [etc]:
              Van Dorp. [First edition 1969.]
1979          Un pueblo na kaminda. Een sociologisch historische studie van de Curacaose samenleving.
              Zutphen: De Walburg Pers. [Ph thesis, University of Leiden, 1977.)
1993          ‘Cultuurbehoud en cultuurverandering. Een Caribisch dilemma’ Kristof 8(3): 5-21.
1998          De Curacaose samenleving. Curagao: Amigoe N.V.
Römer, R.(ed.)
1977          Cultureel Mozaïek van de Nederlandse Antillen. Varianten en constanten. Zutphen: De
              Walburg Pers.
Römer-Kenepa, Nolda
1980          Vrouwenleven op Curagao. Laat achttiende eeuw en vroeg negentiende eeuw. Amsterdam:
              s.n. [Master's thesis, Free University of Amsterdam. ]
Rojer, Robert
1997          Vanuit de blauwzwarte diepte. Marcus Dahlhaus en Martinus Niewindt: een cultuur-his-
              torisch essay. Rotterdam: Erasmus Publishing.
Rooijakkers, Gerard
1994          Rituele repertoires. Volkscultuur in oostelijk Noord-Brabant 1559-1853. Nijmegen: SUN.
Rosalia, René V.
1989          Manual di yabi yoatina. Un antalogia di e músika di seu di Korsou.|Willemstad,
              Curacao]: [s.n.].
1997          Tambú. De legale en kerkelijke repressie van Afro-Curacaose volksuitingen. Zutphen: De
              Walburg Pers [PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam. |
2002          Migrated Rhythm. The Tambú of Curacao.
              http://kaleidoscope.caribseek.com/Rene_Rosalia/Tambu/ 20-5-2005
Rozenkrans
1879-1964   De Rozenkrans. Maandschrift onder redactie van een Pater der Predikheeren- Orde.
             Paters Dominicanen, Nijmegen/Huisen: s.n.
Rupert, Linda M.
1999         Roots of Our Future. A Commercial History of Curacao. Curacao: Curacao Chamber of
             Commerce & Industry.
Russell-Wood, A.J.R.
              The Black Man in Slavery and Freedom in Colonial Brazil. Oxford: Macmillan Press.
Rustige, J.
1934          De Curacaosche vereeniging van hoedenvlechters “Arbeid Adelt”: alsmede eenige alge-
              meene opmerkingen over de Curagaosche stroohoedenvlecht-nijverheid. Amsterdam:
              J.E. Duwaer.
Rutgers, Gerrit Willem
1994         Schrijven is zilver, spreken is goud. Oratuur, auratuur en literatuur van de Nederlandse
             Antillen en Aruba. Sl; s.n. [PhD thesis, University of Utrecht.
2001          Tropentaal. 200 jaar Antilliaanse vertelkunst. Amsterdam [etc]: Contact.
Rutten, Alfons Martinus Gerardus
1989          Apothekers en chirurgijns. Gezondsheidszorg op de Benedenwindse Eilanden van de Ned-
              es Antillen in de negentiende eeuw. Assen: Van Gorcum. [PhD thesis, University of
                eiden.
              ‘Een onbekende slavenopstand op Curacao) Neerlandia 96(5): 182-5.



284
1999         Even slikken: vier eeuwen genezers en geneesmiddelen op Curagao’, in: Henny E.
             Coomans,    Maritza   Coomans-Eustatia     and Johan van    ’t Leven   (eds), Veranderend
             Curacao. Collectie essays opgedragen aan Lionel Capriles ter gelegenheid van zijn 45-jarig
             jubileum bij de Maduro & Curiel’s Bank N.V., p. 126-59. Bloemendaal: Stichting Libri
             Antilliani.
2003         Magische kruiden in de Antilliaanse folklore: etnofarmacologie van het Caribisch gebied.
             Rotterdam: Erasmus Publishing.
Rutten, Alfons Martinus Gerardus, Lodewijk Wilhelm Statius van Eps
1998         Vergiftiging met toxische planten op Curacao in 1766) in: Nederlandsch tijdschrift voor
             geneeskunde: tevens orgaan der Koninklijke Nederlandsche Maatschappij tot Bevordering
             der Geneeskunst, vol. 142 (1998), issue 51 (dec), p. 2796-2798.
Salomon, H.P.
1982         ‘The Earliest Known Document in Papiamentu Contextually Reconsidered’, Neophilolo-
             gus Publisher, Springer Netherlands 66(3): 367-76.
Sankatsing, G.
2001         ‘Social Science as a Victim of its Own Disciplines. The English- and Dutch-Speaking
             Caribbean; in: Christine Barrow and Rhoda Reddock (eds), Caribbean Sociology. Intro-
             ductory Readings, p. 56-68. Kingston, Jamaica: Ian Randle Publishers.
Schiltkamp, J.A., P.V. Sjiem Fat and M.R. Wijnholt (eds)
1969         Honderd jaar codificatie in de Nederlandse Antillen. Arnhem: Uitgeversmaatschappij S.
             Gouda Quint/D. Brouwer en Zoon.
Schipper, B.A.
1933-34      Uit de missie van Curacao. Katholieke gebruiken op de West-Indische eilanden’, Lec-
             tuur voor de Leden van den Sint Dominicus-Penning 107: 1-9; 108: 16-21.
Schrijnen, Jos
1930-1933    Nederlandsche Volkskunde. (Second, revised edition, 2 vols.) Zutphen: Thieme & Cie.
Scott, James C.
1990         Domination and the Arts of Resistance. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Scott, Rebecca J.
1987         ‘Comparing Emancipations. A Review Essay’ Journal of Social History 20: 565.
1988         ‘Exploring the Meaning of Freedom. Post-Emancipation Societies in Comparative Per-
             spective’, Hispanic American Historical Review 68(3): 407-28.
2000         Beyond Slavery. Explorations of Race, Labor, and Citizenship in Post-Emancipation Socte-
             ties. Chapel Hill [etc]: University of North Carolina Press.
Sharpe, J.
1991        ‘History from Below’, in Peter Burke (ed.) New Perspectives on Historical Writing, p. 24-
            41. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Shepherd, Verene A.
2002        Working Slavery, Pricing Freedom. Perspectives from the Caribbean, Africa and the African
            Diaspora. Kingston, Jamaica: Ian Randle Publishers.
Shepherd, Verene A. and Hillary Beckles (eds)
1993        Caribbean Freedom. Economy and Society from Emancipation to the Present. Kingston,
             Jamaica: lan Randle Publishers.
2000         Caribbean Slavery in the Atlantic World. Kingston, Jamaica: lan Randle Publishers. [2nd
            ed.]
Shepherd, Verene A., Bridget Brereton and Barbara Bailey (eds)
1995         Engendering History. Caribbean Women in Historical Perspective. Selection of Papers pre-
             sented at the International Symposium ‘Engendering History. Current Directions in the
             Study of Women and Gender in Caribbean History, held at the University of the West
             Indies, Mona Campus, 10-12 Nov. 1993. Kingston, Jamaica: Ian Randle Publishers; Lon-
             don: James Currey.



                                                                                                   285
                                                                            .                .
Simpson, George Eaton
             Religious Cult of the Caribbean.  Trinidad, Jamaica and  Haiti.  San Juan: Institute of
1980
             Caribbean Studies, University of Puerto Rico.
Sjiem Fat, Paul Valentijn
1986         Biba Willem Sassen, de procureur-generaal Mr. W.K.C. Sassen Jz. (1870-1871). Curagaos
             rechtsleven in de 19e eeuw. Zutphen: De Walburg Pers. [PhD thesis, University of Nij-
             megen. |
Smidt de, Jacobus and Jacob Adriaan Schiltkamp
1978        Publikaties en andere wetten alsmede de oudste resoluties betrekking hebbende op Curacao,
            Aruba, Bonaire. I: 1638-1782. II: 1782-1816. Amsterdam: Emmering.
Smith, Jenny M.
2001         When the Hands Are Many. Community Organization and Social Change in Rural Haiti.
             Ithaca, NY [etc]: Cornell University Press.
Smith, M.G.
1965          The Plural Society in the British West Indies. Berkeley [etc]: University of California
             Press.
1981         ‘Awa dushi. Landbouwmogelijkheden op Curacao’ Kristof 6(6): 3-33.
Spierenburg, Petrus Cornelis
1988         De Verloren Betovering. Mentaliteitsgeschiedenis van Pre-industrieel Europa. Hilversum:
             Verloren. (Transl. as The Broken Spell. A Cultural and Anthropological History of Prein-
             dustrial Europe. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press 1991.)
Staatscommissie
1856         Rapport der Staatscommissie, benoemd bij Koninklijk besluit van 29 November 1853, no.
             66 tot het voorstellen van maatregelen ten aanzien van de slaven in de Nederlandsche kolo-
              nién. Uitgegeven op last van den Minister van Kolonién. ’s-Gravenhage: Van Cleef.
Stampp, Kenneth
1956          The Peculariar Institution. Slavery in the Ante-Bellum South. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Steegstra, Marijke
2004         Resilient Rituals [PhD thesis, University of Nijmegen. ]
Streefkerk, Cees
1995            ‘Het sociaal functioneren van de kerken op Curacao, in: Henny E. Coomans, Maritza
                Coomans-Eustatia and Peter Prins (eds), met medewerking van Johan van ’t Leven,
                Caraibische Cadens. Liber Amicorum opgedragen aan de gevolmachtigde minster van de
                Nederlandse Antillen Edsel A.V. [Papy] Jesurun, p. 154-65. Bloemendaal: Stichting Libri
                Antilliani.
1999            ‘De veranderende Katholieke kerk binnen de Curagaose samenleving’ in: Henny E.
                Coomans,   Maritza Coomans-Eustatia        and Johan van ’t Leven    (eds), Veranderend
             Curacao. Collectie essays opgedragen aan Lionel Capriles ter gelegenheid van zijn 45-jarig
             jubileum bij de Maduro & Curiel’s Bank N.V., p. 327-47. Bloemendaal: Stichting Libri
             Antilliani.
2003            ‘Beeldvorming en religie’, in: Rose Mary Allen, Coen Heijes en Valdemar Marcha,
                Emancipatie & acceptatie. Curacao en Curagaoënaars. Beeldvorming en identiteit hon-
                derdveertig jaar na de slavernij, p. 35-50. Amsterdam: SWP.
Sythoff, A.W.
1857            Curacao. Herinneringen en schetsen door S. van Dissel. Leiden: Sijthoff.
Teenstra, M.D.
1977         De Nederlandsch West-Indische eilanden, in derzelver tegenwoordige toestand. Facsimile
             reprint, Amsterdam: Emmering. [First published in 1836-1837, Amsterdam: Sulpke.]
Terpstra, Linda en Anke van Dijk
1987         Je kunt maar beter bij je moeder. Ongehuwde vrouwen met kinderen op Curacao. Leiden:
                Caraibische Afdeling, Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde.




286
Thompson, E.P.
1977       The Making of the English Working Class. London: Penguin Books.
199           Customs in Common. New York: New Press.
Thompson, Paul
1978          Voices of the Past. Oxford: Oxford University Press. [Reprinted in 1988 and 2000. |
Thornburg, John Carter
1990           Common property in the Eastern Caribbean: family land tenure in economy and society in
               St. Lucia, West Indies. Ann Arbor, Mich.: University Microfilms International.
Thornton, John
1998           Africa and Africans in the Making of the Atlantic World, 1400-1800. Cambridge/New
               York: Cambridge University Press.
Tonkin, E.
1992           Narrating our Past. The Social Construction of Oral History. New York: Cambridge Uni-
               versity Press.
Triebels, L.F.
1980           Ocho dia of novena: een “Afrikaanse retentie” in het Caribisch gebied. Rede, uitgesproken
               bij de aanvaarding van het ambt van gewoon hoogleraar in de inleiding in de culturele
               antropologie en de volken en culturen van Amerika aan de Katholieke Universiteit te
               Nijmegen op Vrijdag 14 maart 1980. Nijmegen: Katholieke Universiteit Nijmegen.
Trollope, Anthony
1860           The West Indies and the Spanish Main. London: Chapman & Hall.
Trouillot, Michel-Rolph
1995           Silencing the Past. Power and the Production of History. Boston: Bacon Press.
1998          ‘Culture on the Edges. Creolization in the Plantation Context’, Plantation Society in the
              Americas 5(1): 8-28.
Tylor, Edward B.
1871         Primitive Culture. London: J. Murray.
Vansina, Jan
1985          Oral Tradition as History. Madison/Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press.
Veen, van der, A.M.D.
1984          Hoedenvlechten als kostwinning: een onderzoek naar de invloed van de hoedenvlechterij op
              de sociaal-economische positie van vrouwen op Curacao en Bonaire in de eerste helft van
              de twintigste eeuw. [Master's thesis, University of Leiden. |
Veer, J.R.G. de
1899          ‘De kolonie Cura¢ao, Vragen van den dag 14 (1899): 320-33.
Verslagen
1897-1903    Jaarlijkse verslagen van het Geschied-, Taal-, Land- en Volkenkundig Genootschap
             Curacao, 1897-1903. Eerste - zesde jaarlijksch verslag van het Geschied-, Taal-, Land- en
             Volkenkundig Genootschap gevestigd te Willemstad, Curacao. [Fascimile reprinted in
              1985, Amsterdam: Emmering.]
Warner, Keith
1982        Kaiso! The Trinidad Calypso. Washington, D.C.: Three Continents Press.
Watson, Llewellyn G.
1991         Jamaican Sayings. A Study of Folklore, Aesthetics, and Social Control. Tallahassee: Florida
             A & M University Press.
Weber, M.                                                                                           5
1921         ‘Rapport betreffende een voorlopig onderzoek naar den toestand van de Visscherij en
             de Industrie van Zeeproducten in de Kolonie Curagao, ingevolge het Ministerieel
             Besluit d.d. 22 November     1904 uitgebracht door Dr. J. Boeke, Iste en Ilde Gedeelte’,
             West-Indi-sche Gids 3: 215-7.




                                                                                                    287
Weeber, Leon                                                                                   .
2004          Historia di plantashi Sabaneta, segun Francisco “Bubuchi”    Doran. Curacao: Nationaal
              Archeologisch Antropologisch Museum.
Wel, F.J. van and G.E. van Zanen
1969        David Ricardo Capriles. Student, geneesheer, schrijver, Curacao, 1837-1902. Zutphen:
            Van Gorcum.
Went, FA.EC.                                                                                |
1902        Rapport omtrent den toestand van land- en tuinbouw op de Nederlandsche Antillen.
            ’s-Gravenhage: Algemeene Landsdrukkerij.
Whitten, Norman E. and John F. Szwed
1970         ‘Introduction’ in: J. Szwed and Norman E. Whitten (eds), Afro-American Anthropology.
             Contemporary Perspectives, p. 23-60. New York: The Free Press.
Wilk, Richard R.
1999         ‘Real Belizean Food. Building Local Identity in the Transnational Caribbean’, American
             Anthropologist 101(2): 244-55.
Williams, Eric
1944            Capitalism and Slavery. New York: Putnam’s Sons.
Wilson, Peter J.
1973          Crab antics: the social anthropology of English-speaking Negro societies of the Caribbean.
             New Haven: Yale University Press.
Witteveen, I.
1992          ‘El tambu y la mujer en Curacao. Imagenes en la encrucijada de culturas’ in: Richenel
             Ansano, et al. (eds), Mundu yama sinta mira. Womanhood in Curacao, p. 107-16.
              Curagao: Fundashon Publikashon.
2006          ‘René Römer over cultureel erfgoed en de restauratie van het geheugen’ in Mayra van
              der Dijs (ed.), René Römer als inspirator. Actualisering van zijn gedachtegoed, p. 30-41.
              Curacao: University of the Netherlands Antilles.
Wolf, Eric R.
1982        Europe and the People Without History. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wolfert, G.
1980        ‘De Curacaosche plantages in de 18e eeuw’, Kristof 5(4): 1-18.
Woodville, Marshall
1993        Emancipation IV. A Series of Lectures to commemorate the 150th Anniversary of Emanci-
           pation. [Ed. by Emancipation IV.] Jamaica [etc]: Canoe Press.
Zanten, Wim van and Marjolijn van Roon (eds)
1995       ‘Ethnomusicology in the Netherlands. Present Situation and Traces of the Past’, Research
           School CNWS publication 35. [Special publication]. Leiden: Research School CNWS.
Zwijsen, V.
1910            Vereniging Oost en West. Commissie tot verspreiding van populaire kennis omtrent
                Nederlandsch Oost en West Indië. [S.1.]: [s.n.].




288
APPENDIX             I

Overview of material collected by
Brenneker and Juliana



Category           Subcategory
Songs              Work songs
                   Religious songs
                   Ceremonial songs
                   Satirical songs
                   Love songs
                   Lullabies
                   School songs
                   Story songs
                   Game songs
                   Selling songs
Narratives         Historical stories
                   Tricksters
                   Personal stories
                   Etiological tales (explaining why things are the way they are)
                   Reminiscences
                   Religious stories
Lists              Place-names
                   Personal names (epithets)
                   Nicknames
                   Plant names
                   Artifact names
                   Fish names
                   Games (ring games)
Folk beliefs and   Conception, pregnancy, birth and infancy, twins, baptism
customs            Dating, love, courtship and marriage
                   Diseases, healing and remedies
                   Ceremonial customs
                   Agriculture
                   Dying, death and funeral arrangements
                   Nature, flora and fauna
                   Economics



                                                                                    289
 Folk sayings,   Children's rhymes, fingerplay sayings
 rhymes and      Play rhymes
 proverbs        Game rhymes
                 Riddles
                 Peddler cries
                 Euphemisms
 Folk material   Several artifacts   (domestic, religious, musical)




290
AP PEND

Overview of types of songs


Category           Type and translation
Work songs         Kantika di bati ku tati (when pounding cactus with the mortar called 'tati')
                   Kantika di bati maishi den pilon (when pounding millet in a mortar
                   made of a tree-trunk)
                   Kantika di mula maishi (when grinding millet)
                   Kantika di bua kanoa (when rowing the fishing boat)
                   Kantika di hala kanoa (when beaching the fishing boat)
                   Kantika di karga hamaka (when carrying a sick person in a hammock)
                   Kantika di koba pos (when digging a well)
                   Kantika di mukel (when using a sledge-hammer)
                   Kantika di kore ficho (when taking coal to shore to be loaded onto the boats)
                   Kantika di dèmpel (when filling holes)
                   Kantika di rema ponchi (when carrying people on small boats across the
                   harbour)
Religious songs    Kantika di San Antoni (songs for Saint Anthony)
                   Kantika di San Wan (songs for Saint John)
Ceremonial songs   Kantika di set (for the harvest festival)
                   Kantika di bati huda (for the procession in which people would beat a doll
                   in the figure of the apostle Judas who betrayed Jezus)
                   Kantika di chiwewe (for the novena for Holy Mary)
                   Kantika di djasabra (Saturday song)
                   Kantika di ocho dia (for the eight-nights ceremony upon someone's death)
                   or
                   Kantika di dum ve (for the eight-nights ceremony upon someone's death)
                   Kantika di Zé (for the eight days in which a child is protected against Zé)
Satirical songs    Tambu
                   Kantika di aa nobo (for the new year)
                   Kantika di puna (satire)
                   Kantika di pleizi (for enjoyment)
Lullabies          Kantika pa hasi yu drumi
School songs       Kantika di skol
Story songs        Kantika di storia
Game songs         Kantika di mucha (for children)
                   Kantika di hunga palu (for stick dance)



                                                                                             291
                         Wega di spelchi (for games)
                         Samanakitoki (for stick dance)

                               =




                                                                         ra     Bad                              ‘
                                                                                                                 y
                                                                                                             ¥
                                                                                                                 5


                                   SAL
                                   ees
                                                                                         4?




                                                                     '                   ee
                                                                                              ~
                                                   =                 ~~             7          4£
                                                                                    ja        aw

                                             rag       any          Diy? th     Ne Pyeng                iw
                                         ì                   apa:    all      ef.     oem


Baie   G   rj   en   4    ‚Stes      Dies
                                             ee        of)
                                                               ee
                                                               di   Gases       e                   a
ABP
  EN DAX
Observations on demographic figures,
1863-1917

  Table 1. Population and Migration by Sex, Curacao 1863-1917


                      Population                            Net migration           Sex ati
 Year       Male        Female          Total        Male       Female      Total
1863         8747         10397        19144         -118           60       -58      0.84
1864         |            10527        19379           36          269       305      0.84
1865         8989         10875        19864           48          226       274      0.83
1866         9022         11263        20285           44          -28         16     0.80
1867         9301         11401                      -165          -38      -203      0.82


1870                                                  -83                      5      0.85
1871                                                  5D                              0.83
1872                      11991      21900                                            0.83
1873                      12273      22345                                            0.82
1874                      12628    | 22713                                            0.80
1875                      13209      23972                                            0.81
1876                      13168      23790                                            0.81
1877                                 23617                                            0.80
1878                                                                                  0.81
1879                                                                                  0.79
1880                                                                                  0.79
1881                                                                                  0.79
1882                                                                                  0.79
1883                                                                     |
                                                                         -491 |       079

1885                     14345         25362         -447         -210                0.77


1888                                   25663         -229         -179                0.75


1891       11307         W527,         26584          310          195       505      0.74


                                                                                             293
                             Population                         Net migration          Sex ratio

 Year             Male     | Female           E Total    Male      hema Total

 1892            11866 | 15627     27254                  869 |       -165     704         0.76
 1893            12962 | 15596     27319                 EN            172 | -1053         0.83
 1894            12071   15944     27763                  -79          oat    -110         0.76
 1895            12278   16137  LT 28187                 -120          161       4]        0.76
 1896            12430   16454     29081                   29         -358    -329         0.76
 1897            12714   16384 5:  29098                  -60          -24      -84        0.78
 1898            12975   16583     29558                  262           72     334         0.78
 1899            13285   16834     30119                  -61          307     246         0.79
 1900            13390 | 17246     30636                 -285           96    -189         0.78
 1901            13306   17515     30821                   47           Tai    124         0.76
 1902            13565   17786     31351                 -395         -166    -561         0.76
 1903            13501   17870     31371                   37                              0.76
 1904            13608   17899     31507                 -247         -558      -805       0.76
 1905            13534   17556     31090                              -205      -914       0.77
 1906                                                                  302       618       0.74
 1907                                                                            44        0.75
 1908                                                                           -310       07
 1909                                                                            933       0.81
 1910                                                                           455        0.78
 1911
 1912                                                                            253       0.78
 1913                             18504                                                    0.78
                                                                                  22


 1917            15269            19624          34893                                     0.78

      Source: Koloniale verslagen 1863-1918



From 1863 until 1917 the Curagaoan population increased from 19,144 to 34,893 people,
or 82 per cent over a period of 54 years. This demographic growth was the net outcome of
two countervailing trends: natural population growth on the one hand and decrease due
to an emigration surplus of 3125 on the other. There are two remarkable gender contrasts
in this demographic chart. First, with a sex ratio oscillating between 0.74 and 0.85, there
was a strong female domination in the total population. Second, there is an imbalance in
migration patterns: for women an immigration surplus was recorded (1121), for men an
emigration surplus (4346). The latter imbalance only explains a fraction of the total gen-
der imbalance.


294
DI KI MANERA?
The social history of the Afro-Curacaoans, 1863-1917.
HOE DOEN WE HET?
De sociale geschiedenis van de Afro-Curaoénaars, 1863-1917.
Rose Mary Allen



 In deze dissertatie staan de culturele processen centraal die het dagelijkse leven van Afro-
 Curagaoënaars na de afschaffing van de slavernij (1863) hebben beïnvloed. Er wordt geke-
 ken naar de invloed die de koloniale overheid, de voormalige slavenhouders en vooral de
 Rooms-Katholieke kerk uitoefenden op het leven van de Afro-Curacaoénaars na de eman-
 cipatie. Ook wordt nagegaan hoe deze groep een eigen invulling gaf aan de vrijheid en hoe
 zij omging met de interventies van hogerhand. Het begrip macht staat hierbij centraal.
 Deze was zeer ongelijk verdeeld: economische, sociale en raciale ongelijkheid kenmerkten
 de negentiende-eeuwse Curagaose maatschappij.
     De hoofdvraag in het proefschrift luidt: welke rol speelden de overheid, de voormalige
 slavenhouders en de Rooms-Katholieke kerk in het leven van de Afro-Curagaoënaars na de
 emancipatie, en op welke wijze hebben de Afro-Curagaoënaars zowel binnen als buiten de
beïnvloedsferen van deze instituten invulling kunnen geven aan hun materiele, sociale en
geestelijke leven.
     Er is tot nu toe nog maar weinig studie verricht naar de thematiek van slavernij en haar
erfenissen in de Curagaose geschiedenis. Daarin loopt Curagao achter in vergelijking met
een aantal andere landen van de Cariben, waar veel eerder studies zijn verschenen in de
sfeer van 'slavery from within’. Ook is er weinig onderzoek gedaan naar de manier, waar-
op de Afro-Curagaoënaars na 1863 richting hebben gegeven aan hun leven. In dat Eman-
cipatiejaar kregen zo'n 6000 slaven op het eiland hun vrijheid. Dat betrof vijfendertig pro-
cent van de totale bevolking. Op dit eiland bestond dus al voor de emancipatie reeds een
grote groep van vrijgemaakte slaven. In Suriname ging het om vijfenvijftig procent op een
totale bevolking van 60.000 mensen. In dit opzicht verschilt Curacao niet alleen van Suri-
name, maar ook van de rest van de Cariben.
     In zijn ten geleide bij het schoolmakende boek van Harry Hoetink, Het patroon van de
oude Curacaose samenleving, schreef de socioloog Rudolph van Lier dat de sociale situatie
na de emancipatie maar weinig veranderde aan het karakter van de oude Curacaose
samenleving. De Utrechtse socioloog Harry Hoetink bestudeerde als eerste de Curagaose
samenleving vanuit een sociaal-historische context. Zijn studie onderstreepte Van Liers
stelling. Dit geldt ook voor de dissertatie Un pueblo na kaminda van de Curagaose socio-
loog René Romer, die stelde dat pas de komst van de olieraffinaderij in de twintigste eeuw
een fundamentele verandering inluidde in de sociale geschiedenis van het eiland en in de
sociale positie van de zwarte Curagaoenaars. Ook latere schrijvers benadrukten dat deze
nazaten in armoedige situatie verder moesten leven.
    De vraag blijft dan toch in hoeverre deze groep, binnen de bestaande machtsbegren-
zingen, haar eigen leefwijze heeft kunnen creëren en bepalen. De formeel verkregen


                                                                                         295
vrijheid vergde immers adaptaties en heroriéntaties, niet alleen op het gebied van hande-
len, maar ook in het denken en voelen. Om verder invulling te geven aan de vrijheid en
hun aspiraties en verwachtingen waar te maken, moesten zij deels voortbouwen op de ken-
nis en ideeén, die zij zich in de jaren van slavernij hadden eigen gemaakt, deels zich nieu-
we ideeén en houdingen aanleren.
     In het eerste hoofdstuk van het proefschrift wordt het theoretische kader vastgelegd. De
ontwikkeling van de Curagaose geschiedschrijving wordt geschetst, met bijzondere aan-
dacht voor de plaats die Afro-Curagaoënaars daarin kregen. Daar deze studie zich op het
snijvlak bevindt van geschiedenis en antropologie, wordt nagegaan welke theorieën er
gebruikt zijn om sociaal-culturele processen in Curagao en, ruimer, in het Caribische
gebied als geheel te analyseren. Het begrip culturele complexiteit, waarmee in deze disser-
tatie wordt gewerkt, staat daarbij centraal. Dit begrip wordt tegenwoordig gebruikt om aan
te geven hoe globalisering culturen voortdurend confronteert met nieuwe processen, goe-
deren en betekenissen. Caribische samenlevingen hebben zulke processen al eeuwenlang
meegemaakt, altijd in een situatie van zeer onevenwichtige economische, sociale en racia-
le machtsverhoudingen.
     In het tweede hoofdstuk wordt nader ingegaan op de methodologie die gehanteerd is
bij deze studie. Een groot deel van de informatie is gebaseerd op interviews die ik in de
jaren tachtig van de vorige eeuw heb gehouden met oudere mensen uit de Curacaose
samenleving, die eind negentiende eeuw, begin twintigste eeuw waren geboren. De uit-
komsten hiervan werden getoetst aan informatie verkregen uit verschillende soorten
geschreven bronnen en uit de orale bronnen van de Zikinzá-collectie. Laatstgenoemde col-
lectie, nu ondergebracht in het Nationale Archief, bevat interviews die rond 1960 door
pater Paul Brenneker en Elis Juliana werden afgenomen. Ook heb ik gebruik gemaakt van
interviews die door Brenneker en Juliana werden afgenomen en die gearchiveerd zijn in de
Openbare Bibliotheek van Curacao.
     In hoofdstuk drie wordt het leven van vòòr 1863 bestudeerd en geanalyseerd. Het gaat
er daarin vooral om de belangrijkste kenmerken te benoemen die het dagelijkse leven van
slaven hebben bepaald. In dit hoofdstuk worden culturele karakteristieken van de slaven-
gemeenschap beschreven, als ook die van de ‘vrije zwarten’ en ‘kleurlingen’ in deze perio-
de. Cultuur is immers een dynamisch proces. Wat na de emancipatie gebeurde vloeide
mede voort uit de wijze waarop het culturele leven zich voordien had ontwikkeld.
     Het vierde hoofdstuk draait om de percepties die leefden ten aanzien van de vraag hoe
Afro-Curagaoënaars zouden omgaan met de verkregen vrijheid. Deze beelden komen dui-
delijk tot uiting in toespraken van gezagdragers en leden van de Rooms-Katholieke Kerk.
De Afro-Curacaose perceptie over die vrijheid vond een neerslag onder meer in liederen
en de mondelinge overlevering.
     De hoofdstukken vijf en zes zijn gericht op de twee instituties met het meeste gezag in
en macht over het sociale leven van de Afro-Curagaoënaars. Het vijfde hoofdstuk
bespreekt de sociale controle van de koloniale staat. De overheid kwam in het kader van de
emancipatie met regels en reglementen om het sociale gedrag van de pas vrijgeworden
Afro-Curacaoënaars te beïnvloeden. Deze regels waren mede gebaseerd op het beeld dat de
lokale elites van deze groep heeft. Veel Afro-Curacaoënaars bleven op de plantages wonen
via het paga tera’ systeem, waarbij zij verplicht waren in ruil voor het landgebruik een aan-


296
tal dagen per jaar gratis voor de plantagehouder te werken. Indirect had laatstgenoemde
ook sociale controle op hun leven. Via regels op het gebied van openbare orde probeerde
de koloniale overheid daarnaast het sociale gedrag van mensen die buiten de beinvloe-
dingsfeer van de plantageeigenaren woonden te regelen.
     De invloed van de Rooms-Katholieke kerk is heel bepalend gebleken voor het sociaal-
culturele leven van de Afro-Curagaoénaars. Door de kerstening van slaven en vrijen werd
zij de grootste christelijke kerk op het eiland. In haar 'beschavingsoffensief' intervenieerde
de kerk rechtstreeks in het dagelijkse leven van deze groep. Dit gebeurde onder meer via
het onderwijs en maatschappelijke hulp. De kerk probeerde haar volgelingen ‘correct’
gedrag bij te brengen. De middelen hiertoe varieerden van prediking en indoctrinatie tot
fysieke kastijding. In dit hoofdstuk wordt tevens onderzocht hoe de Afro-Curacaoénaars
deze beïnvloeding door staat en kerk internaliseerden in het dagelijkse leven, of zich hier
juist tegen verzetten.
     In de volgende drie hoofdstukken wordt weergegeven hoe het dagelijkse leven van de
Afro-Curacaoénaars vorm kreeg buiten bovengenoemde kaders. De relatie tussen macht
en sociale marginalisering heb ik tot uitdrukking willen brengen door middel van het
Papiamentse woord 'bida', dat leven betekent. Deze term werd heel vaak gebruikt in de
interviews met nazaten van slaven. De term betekent veel meer dan alleen maar leven. Het
verwijst naar de pluriforme en complexe wijzen waarop Afro-Curagaoënaars ook na de
emancipatie zelf richting probeerden te geven aan hun leven. In deze hoofdstukken wordt
het dagelijkse leven bekeken vanuit economische, sociale en spirituele perspectieven.
    Hoofdstuk zeven, 'Buska bida' (letterlijk ‘het zoeken naar leven') behandelt de vraag
welke strategieën Afro-Curagaoënaars ontwikkelden om economisch te kunnen overleven,
rekeninghoudend met de problematische natuurlijke gesteldheid van het eiland. Er wordt
gekeken naar het sterke verlangen om door bezit van een stuk land onafhankelijk van de
plantagehouders te kunnen leven. Deze behielden na de emancipatie immers veel macht
over het land. De emigratie naar landen in de buurt was een andere overlevingsstrategie en
werd vooral door mannen opmerkelijk vaak gebruikt om werk en inkomen te zoeken.
    In hoofdstuk acht, 'Drecha bida' (te vertalen als ‘verbetering van het sociale leven’)
wordt onderzocht hoe men invulling gaf aan het sociale leven. Dit betrof de relatie man-
vrouw en ouder(s)-kinderen, maar ook de ruimere familieverbanden. Centraal staat hier
de vraag wat door de groep zelf gezien wordt als een respectvolle leefwijze tussen man en
vrouw en tussen ouder(s) en kinderen en in hoeverre men er in slaagde hieraan gestalte te
geven.
    Hoofdstuk negen, 'Tambú di bida' (‘de trommel van het leven’) analyseert de levensvi-
sie en levenshouding van de Afro-Curagaoënaars zoals deze zich in en vooral na de slaver-
nij ontwikkelde in de context die zo sterk werd bepaald door moeizame sociaal-economi-
sche omstandigheden en ongelijke machtsrelaties.
Het tiende en laatste hoofdstuk biedt de conclusies van het proefschrift. De nadruk ligt op
de complexiteit van het sociale leven na de emancipatie. Deze complexiteit werd mede
bepaald door de gevarieerdheid in de samenstelling van de Afro-Curagaose bevolking zelf.
Reeds tijdens de slavernij kon men niet spreken van een monolithische groep. Deze geva-
rieerdheid werd bepaald door verschillende factoren, zoals de plaats van herkomst in
Afrika, het aantal generaties dat aanwezig was in de Curacaose samenleving, variaties in


                                                                                          DO
huidskleur en andere fysieke kenmerken, gender, generatie en de vraag of men slaaf was of
reeds vrij. Aan deze differentiaties werden onmiskenbaar culturele waarderingen gehecht.
Na de emancipatie nam de interne diversiteit slechts toe. Deze context bepaalde mede hoe
succesvol de beinvloedingsstrategieén van de koloniale staat, de voormalige slavenhouders
en Rooms-Katholieke kerk konden zijn, en evengoed hoe verschillende groepen en indivi-
duen binnen de Afro-Curagaose bevolkingsgroep zelf inhoud gaven aan hun levens.
Dit proefschrift poogt inzicht te geven in processen die het denken en handelen van men-
sen in onze hedendaagse Curagaosche maatschappij nog steeds bepalen. Heel vaak zijn wij
ons er niet van bewust hoe diepgaand deze ideeën nog doorwerken in ons denken en han-
delen. De reflectie over ons verleden kan ons ook helpen in onze oriëntatie op onze heden-
daagse uitdagingen.




298
DI KI MANERA?
Historia sosial di afro-kurasolenonan, 1863-1917.

Rose Mary Allen




 Sentral den e disertashon aki ta e prosesonan kultural ku a influensiá bida di tur dia di
 afro-kurasolenonan despues ku na 1863 a aboli sklabitut. A pone den foko e influensia ku
 gobiérnu kolonial, dofonan di katibu den nan tempu i prinsipalmente Iglesia katéliko a
 ehersé riba bida di afro-kurasolenonan despues di emansipashon. A verifiká tambe kon e
 grupo aki a duna kontenido propio na e libertat ku nan a hana i kon e hendenan aki a anda
 ku intervenshon di gobièrnu. E konsepto 'poder' den e kaso aki ta di mayor importansia.
 Poder tabata reparti di forma desigual: desigualdat ekonómiko, sosial i rasial a karakterisa
 e sosiedat kurasoleno di siglo djesnuebe.
     E pregunta klave den e tésis aki ta: ki papel gobiérnu, e shonnan, dono di katibu i Igle-
 sia katóliko tabatin den bida di afro-kurasolefonan despues di emansipashon i di ki man-
 era afro-kurasolenonan por a duna kontenido na nan bida material, sosial i spiritual tantu
 paden komo pafó di e ambiente di influensia di e institushonnan aki.
     Te ainda no tin mashá estudio hasi riba e tematika di sklabitut i su herensia den histo-
 ria di Korsou. Den e sentido aki Korsou ta kana atras kompara ku un kantidat di otro pais
 den Karibe, kaminda muchu mas promé a sali estudio den e esfera di 'slavery from with-
in (sklabitut for di paden). No a hasi muchu investigashon tampoko tokante e manera ku
despues di 1863 afro-kurasolenonan a programa nan bida. Den a ana ei di emansipashon
6000 katibu na isla di Kòrsou a hafia nan libertat o sea trintisinku porshentu di e
poblashon total. Promé ku emansipashon na e isla aki tabata eksisti kaba un grupo grandi
di katibu liberá. Na Sürnam tabata trata di sinkuentisinku porshentu di un poblashon total
di 60.000 hende. Den e sentido aki Kòrsou ta diferensia di Sürnam, i tambe for di sobra di
Karibe.
     Den introdukshon di e famoso buki di Harry Hoetink Het patroon van de oude
Curacaose samenleving, e sosiólogo Rudolph van Lier a skibi ku e situashon sosial despues
di emansipashon a trese mashá poko kambio den karakter di e komunidat kursasoleho
bieu. E sosiólogo di Utrecht Harry Hoetink ta e promé hende ku a studia e komunidat
kurasolefio for di un konteksto sosial-históriko. Su estudio a suprayá e ponensia di Van
Lier. Meskos ta konta tambe pa e disertashon Un pueblo na kaminda di e sosiólogo kura-
solefio René Römer, kende a mustra ku ta te ora e refineria di petroli a bini di na siglo binti,
esei a trese un kambio fundamental den e historia sosial di e isla i den e posishon sosial di
e kurasolefio pretu. E eskritornan ku a publika despues tambe a enfatisá ku e desendiente-
nan aki a hafia nan ta sigui biba den pobresa.
    E pregunta ta keda sin embargo den ki medida e grupo aki por a krea i determina nan
propio estilo, denter di e limitashonnan di poder eksistente. Di pursi e libertat optené for-
malmente tabata eksigi adaptashon i reorientashon, no solamente riba tereno di trato, sino
tambe riba e manera di pensa i di sinti. Pa duna kontenido na e libertat i pa realisá nan aspi-
rashon- i ekspektativanan, nan mester a sigui edifika parsialmente riba e konosementu- 1


                                                                                            299
ideanan ku durante e ahanan di sklabitut nan a hasi di nan, i parsialmente nan mester a
sina idea- i aktitutnan nobo.
     Den e promé kapitulo di e tésis ta deliniá e kader teóriko. Ta skèts desaroyo di e histo-
riografia kurasoleno, ku atenshon spesial pa e lugá ku afro-kurasolefionan a hana den dje.
Komo e estudio aki ta nét den e intersekshon di historia i antropologia, ta verifika kua ta
e teorianan ku a usa pa analisá e prosesonan sosial-kultural na Kòrsou i, den un sentido
mas amplio, den teritorio di Karibe komo totalidat. Sentral a pone e konsepto ‘komplehi-
dat kultural', ku kua a traha den e disertashon aki. Awendia ta usa e konsepto aki pa indika
kon globalisashon kontinuamente ta konfrontá kulturanan ku proseso-, merkansia- 1
nifikashonnan nobo. Komunidatnan karibefio a pasa durante hopi siglo kaba den prose-
sonan asina, semper den un situashon di proporshonnan di poder ekonómiko, sosial i
rasial sumamente desekilibrá.
     Den e di dos kapítulo ta sigui elaborá riba e metodologia ku a usa pa hasi e estudio aki.
Gran parti di e informashon ta basá riba entrevista ku e outor a tene na afianan ochenta
di siglo pasá ku personanan di edat mas avansá di e komunidat kurasoleno, kendenan a
nase na fin di siglo djesnuebe, prinsipio di siglo binti. A komprobá e resultadonan ku
informashon optené di varios fuente skibi i fuente oral di e kolekshon Zikinzá. E último
kolekshon aki, ku awor ta na Archivo Nashonal ta kontené entrevista ku alrededor di afia
1960 pader Paul Brenneker i Elis Juliana a tene. Mi a hasi uso tambe di e entrevistanan ku
Brenneker i Juliana a tene i ku ta warda na Biblioteka Publiko di Korsou.
     Den kapitulo tres a studia i analisá e bida di promé ku 1863. Ta nombra aki prinsipal-
mente e karakteristikanan mas importante ku a determina bida diario di e katibunan. Den
e kapitulo aki ta deskribi e karakteristikanan kultural di e komunidat di katibu, meskos
tambe esun di e 'pretunan liberá' i di 'e hendenan di koló' den e periodo aki. Anto kultura
ta un proseso dinamiko. Loke a sosodé despues di emansipashon ta resultado tambe di e
manera ku e bida kultural a desaroyá promé ku esei.
     E di kuater kapitulo ta trata di e persepshonnan ku tabata eksisti respekto di e pregun-
ta kon afro-kurasolenonan lo bai anda ku nan libertat atkiri. E imagennan aki ta sali klara-
mente na kla den diskurso di mandatario- i miembronan di Iglesia katóliko. E persepshon
afro-kurasoleno tokante e libertat ei a reflehá entre otro den kantika i tradishon oral.
      E kapitulonan sinku i seis ta dirigi riba e dos institushonnan ku tin e mayor outoridat
i poder riba bida sosial di afro-kurasolefonan. Kapítulo sinku ta trata e kontrol sosial di
estado kolonial. Den kuadro di emansipashon gobiérnu a bini ku regla- i reglamento pa
influensiá komportashon sosial di e afro-kurasolenonan ku a kaba di hafia nan libertat. E
reglanan aki tabata basa tambe riba e imagen ku e élite lokal tin di e grupo aki. Hopi afro-
kurasolefio a keda biba riba e plantashinan den e sistema di ‘paga tera’. E katibunan e ora
 ei a kambio di uso di tera, mester a traha gratis un kantidat di dia pa afia pa dofio die plan-
tashi. Indirektamente esaki tabatin tambe kontrol sosial riba nan bida. Pa medio di regla
 riba tereno di òrdu públiko gobiérnu kolonial a purba regla ademas komportashon sosial
 di e hendenan ku tabata biba fuera di e ambiente di influensia di e dofonan di plantashi.
 Influensia di Iglesia katóliko a resulta mashá desisivo pa bida sosio-kultural di afro-kura-
solenonan. Pa medio di kristianisá e katibunan i esnan ku a bira liber, Iglesia katóliko a bira
e iglesia kristian mas grandi na e isla. Den su afan di trese 'sivilisashon' Iglesia katóliko
tabata interveni direktamente den bida diario di e grupo. Esaki tabata tuma luga entre otro


300
via ensenansa i yudansa sosial. Iglesia tabata purba sifia su siguidónan un komportashon
‘korekto'. E medionan pa logra esaki tabata varia di predikashi i indoktrinashon te kastigu
fisiko. Den e kapitulo aki a investiga ademas kon afro-kurasolefonan a internalisá e influ-
ensia aki ku estado i iglesia tabata ehersé, òf si presisamente nan tabata duna resistensia.
E tres kapitulo ku ta sigui ta interpreta kon bida diario di afro-kurasolehonan a forma
fuera di e kadernan menshoná aki riba. E relashon entre poder i e marginalisashon sosial
mi a purba ekspresá pa medio di e palabra 'bida'. Ku mashá frekuensia por tende desendi-
entenan di katibu usa e término akí den e entrevistanan. E término ta nifiká muchu mas
ku solamente bida. E ta referí na e formanan pluriforme i kompleho ku kua despues di
emansipashon afro-kurasoleùonan mes a purba duna rumbo na nan bida. Den e kapitulo
aki ta studia bida diario desde perspektivanan ekonómiko, sosial i spiritual.
     Kapitulo shete, 'Buska bida' ta trata e pregunta kua ta e strategianan ku afro-kura-
solenonan a desaroyá pa por a sobrevivi ekonómikamente, teniendo kuenta ku e kondis-
hon problemátiko di naturalesa di e isla. A studia e deseo fuerte pa mediante pida tera por
a biba independiente di e dononan di plantashi. Di pursi e hendenan aki a keda ku hopi
poder riba e tera komo nan propiedat. Emigrashon pa otro paisnan den besindario tabata
un otro strategia pa sobrevivi i ta notabel ku prinsipalmente hende homber a emigrá pa
bai buska trabou i entrada.
     Den kapitulo ocho, 'Drecha bida' (ku por interpreté komo ‘mehorá bida sosial') a
investiga kon a duna kontenido na bida sosial. Ta trata e relashon homber-muhé i mayor i
yu, pero tambe e lasonan mas ekstenso di famia. Sentral ta aki e pregunta kiko e grupo mes
a mira komo un sistema di bida respetuoso entre homber i muhé i entre mayor i yu i den
ki medida a logra duna forma na esaki.
    Kapitulo nuebe, ‘Tambú di bida' ta analisá e vishon i e aktitut di bida ku afro-kura-
solefionan a desaroyá pa nan mes durante i prinsipalmente despues di abolishon di
sklabitut den e konteksto ku asina fuerte situashonnan sosio-ekonómiko difisil i relashon-
nan di poder desigual a determina.
    E di dies i último kapitulo ta ofresé e konklushonnan di e tésis. Enfasis ta riba komple-
hidat di e bida sosial despues di emansipashon. Loke a determina e komplehidat aki tambe
ta e diversidat den komposishon di e pueblo afro-kurasolefio. Durante sklabitut mes kaba
no por a papia di un grupo monolitiko. Diferente faktor tabata determina e diversidat aki,
manera e lugá di prosedensia na Afrika, e kantidat di generashon presente den e komu-
nidat kurasoleno, e variedat di koló di kueru i otro karakteristikanan fisiko, gender, gen-
erashon i e pregunta si un hende tabata katibu Of si e tabata liber kaba. A duna balor kul-
tural indiskutibel na e diferensiashonnan aki. Despues di emansipashon ta oumentá so e
diversidat aki a oumentá. E konteksto aki a yuda fiha kon eksitoso e strategianan di influ-
ensia di estado kolonial, e èks-dofionan di katibu i Iglesia katóliko por tabata i meskos
tambe kon e diferente grupo- i individuonan denter di e grupo di poblashon afro-kura-
soleio mes a duna kontenido na nan bida.
E tésis aki ta purba duna un bista di e prosesonan ku te ainda ta di influensia riba manera
di pensa i di aktua di hende den e komunidat kurasoleno di awendia. Hopi biaha nos no
ta konsiente kon profundo e ideanan aki ta sigui influi den nos manera di pensa i di aktua.
Reflekshon riba nos pasado tambe por yuda nos orienta riba nos retonan di awendia.



                                                                                         301
                                                                                                                     mo
                                                                                            a                                                       r

                                                                                                           ke”
                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                                                                                       ®        °G



                                                                                                                 =                 i        >   &


                                           “4       \                                                                     =   ce       A.       5




                                                                                                  nd

                     8                                                                       et            Ján

                                                                                            cc 6


                                                                       =       8   .



      Ps                 n                     ad       ®   eff            Be          oe


      Npe                        es       St            CORONA                         Wwe . 650.04

    scat?          Goud               c= Mn


:          8       Gag                     Pp               WSLS               @ «©6239qu
               7             ms       ¥    7                      Te   &       i            as         a

               -             2        =    _}                              a                     Lae
Curriculum vitae


Rose Mary Allen was born on December 25, 1950 in Curacao, Netherlands Antilles. From
1965-1969 she visited the Maria Immaculata Lyceum in Curacao, after which she studied
sociology and afterwards cultural anthropology at the Catholic University of Nijmegen,
the Netherlands. In 1977 she received her Master's degree in Cultural and Social Anthro-
pology and returned to Curacao. There she worked as a researcher and staff member at the
Institute of Archeology and Anthropology of the Netherlands Antilles (AAINA) until the
institute's demise in 1998.
    As part of her research at AAINA, Rose Mary Allen conducted many interviews with
descendants of enslaved Africans on several islands of the Netherlands Antilles in order to
document their lives in the post-emancipation period. Meanwhile she started to work on
her dissertation on Afro-Curacaoan social life in post emancipation Curagao. This disser-
tation draws largely on the collected oral histories of Afro-Curagaoans.
    Presently Rose Mary Allen is working as a consultant and lecturer at different institutes
of higher learning on Curacao. She has published several articles on the cultural and social
history of Afro-Curagao.




                                                                                          303
Colofon



Di ki manera?
A Social History of Afro-Curagaoans, 1863-1917
Rose Mary Allen

ISBN 978 90 6665 851 6
NUR 740



Illustration cover
Richard Doest


Design cover, layout and typesetting
Charley Klinkenberg, Amsterdam

Publisher
Paul Roosenstein




For information on other SWP Publications:
P.O.Box 257, 1000 AG Amsterdam
Tel.: + 31 (0)20 330 72 00
E-mail: swp@swpbook.com
Internet: www.swpbook.com
ISBN 978 90 6665 851 6 / NUR 740




  9"789066"658516
    www.swpbook.com
