© 2019 Yarimar Bonilla and Marisol LeBrón

Published in 2019 by
Haymarket Books
P.O. Box 180165
Chicago, IL 60618
773-583-7884
www.haymarketbooks.org
info@haymarketbooks.org

ISBN: 978-1-64259-086-9

Distributed to the trade in the US through Consortium Book Sales and Distribution
(www.cbsd.com) and internationally through Ingram Publisher Services International
(www.ingramcontent.com).

This book was published with the generous support of Lannan Foundation and Wallace
Action Fund.

Special discounts are available for bulk purchases by organizations and institutions. Please
call 773-583-7884 or email info@haymarketbooks.org for more information.

Cover artwork, Pentagramas (Staves) series, detail, 2012, 18 x 12 in, paper cutout, by
Frances Gallardo
Cover design by Rachel Cohen.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data is available.
                         TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword
Arcadio Díaz-Quiñones

Introduction: Aftershocks of Disaster
Yarimar Bonilla and Marisol LeBrón


PART I: OPENINGS
The Trauma Doctrine
A Conversation between Yarimar Bonilla and Naomi Klein

¡Ay María!
Mariana Carbonell, Marisa Gómez Cuevas, José Luis Gutiérrez, José Eugenio Hernández,
Mickey Negrón, Maritza Pérez Otero, and Bryan Villarini; translated by Carina del Valle
Schorske


PART II: NARRATING THE TRAUMA
WAPA Radio: Voices amid the Silence and Desperation
Sandra D. Rodríguez Cotto

María’s Death Toll: On the Crucial Role of Puerto Rico’s Investigative Journalists
Carla Minet

(note for a friend who wants to commit suicide after the hurricane)
Raquel Salas Rivera

“I’m Quite Comfortable”: Abandonment and Resignation after María
Benjamín Torres Gotay

Narrating the Unnameable
Eduardo Lalo

If a Tree Falls in an Island: The Metaphysics of Colonialism
Ana Portnoy Brimmer

This Was Meant to Be a Hurricane Diary
Beatriz Llenín Figueroa

Another Haphazard Gesture
Sofía Gallisá Muriente


PART III: REPRESENTING THE DISASTER
Our Fellow Americans: Why Calling Puerto Ricans “Americans” Will Not Save Them
Frances Negrón-Muntaner

US Media Depictions of Climate Migrants: The Recent Case of the Puerto Rican “Exodus”
Hilda Lloréns

Accountability and Representation: Photographic Coverage after the Disaster
Erika P. Rodríguez

Lifting the Veil: Portraiture as a Tool for Bilateral Representation
Christopher Gregory

The Importance of Politically Engaged Artistic and Curatorial Practices in the Aftermath of
Hurricane María
Marianne Ramírez-Aponte

Si no pudiera hacer arte, me iba: The Aesthetics of Disaster as Catharsis in Contemporary
Puerto Rican Art
Carlos Rivera Santana

Art and a Threshold Called Dignity
TIAGO (Richard Santiago)

Picking up the Pieces
Adrian Roman


PART IV: CAPITALIZING ON THE CRISIS
sinvergüenza sin nación/sinvergüenza with no nation
Raquel Salas Rivera

Puerto Rico’s Unjust Debt
Ed Morales

Puerto Rico’s Debt Is Odious
Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan

Dismantling Public Education in Puerto Rico
Rima Brusi and Isar Godreau

Puerto Rico’s Fight for a Citizen Debt Audit: A Strategy for Public Mobilization and a Fair
Reconstruction
Eva L. Prados-Rodríguez

Rhizomatic
Ana Portnoy Brimmer


PART V: TRANSFORMING PUERTO RICO
Looking for a Way Forward in the Past: Lessons from the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party
Mónica Jiménez

Psychoanalysis as a Political Act after María
Patricia Noboa Ortega

Authenticating Loss and Contesting Recovery: FEMA and the Politics of Colonial Disaster
Management
Sarah Molinari

The Energy Uprising: A Community-Driven Search for Sustainability and Sovereignty in
Puerto Rico
Arturo Massol-Deyá

Community Kitchens: An Emerging Movement?
Giovanni Roberto

Building Accountability and Secure Futures: An Interview with Mari Mari Narváez
Marisol LeBrón

Afterword: Critique and Decoloniality in the Face of Crisis, Disaster, and Catastrophe
Nelson Maldonado-Torres

Acknowledgments

Contributor Bios

Index
                              FOREWORD

                        Arcadio Díaz-Quiñones

Long before Hurricane María, the fiscal and political crisis had invested all
things Puerto Rican with increasing urgency. The threat of total collapse
continues to raise major themes of discussion in a global context: colonial
capitalism, human rights, gender equality, democracy, unpayable debt,
climate change, migration and citizenship, environmental policies, education,
and health care. And yet for many, the newly discovered US “territory” and
the millions of second-class American citizens remain mysterious, or rather
invisible, right before our eyes. Fortunately, there are signs that Puerto Rico’s
and the United States’ long, transnational history—often silenced in the
American mainstream—now commands serious attention from those trying
to come to a better understanding of the legacies of colonialism and of Puerto
Rican resistance.
    The willingness to ask a huge array of new questions inspired the
organizers of the conference entitled “Aftershocks of Disaster—Puerto Rico a
Year after María,” held at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, New
Jersey, in September 2018. I attended the Rutgers colloquium, and what I saw
and listened to in the give-and-take of conversation that day has stayed with
me. The fact that this event was held in New Jersey—and that other colloquia
animated by a similar spirit have been held in New York, Massachusetts,
Connecticut, Illinois, and Washington, DC—shows, first, the strength of the
ethos of solidarity among diverse diasporic communities and the institutions
they have created as well as the moral sensibility of their allies at universities
and research centers. Second, and equally important, it shows how the full
extent of the disaster is driving the research, writing, and activism of a new
generation of scholars and journalists. This is all particularly encouraging,
especially in view of the drastic budgetary cuts that are proving so destructive
for the Universidad de Puerto Rico at the worst possible time.
    Like other islands in the Caribbean, current struggles in Puerto Rico have
roots deep in colonial history, dating back to the old Spanish colony and the
military occupation by the United States in 1898. Still, even in academia,
some have only the vaguest idea of that history, despite the crucial fact that
the Puerto Rican population in the United States—a story spanning more than
a century—has grown to well over five million. History seems to have been
erased from memory. Few remember, for instance, the deaths of thousands of
Puerto Rican soldiers in the Korean and the Vietnam Wars. The United
States’ imperial domination is rarely acknowledged despite significant
scholarly and journalistic publications in Spanish and English, and of the
revelatory poetic voices of Julia de Burgos, Pedro Pietri, and so many others
down to the present day.
     The political, conceptual, and emotional impact of earthshaking
transformations in Puerto Rico is far-reaching. As I listened to the compelling
presentations at the Rutgers meeting, it soon became clear that the aftermath
of María—as has also been said of Hurricane Katrina—reveals much that was
concealed. This is true not only of the extreme social inequalities or the
defunding of public education but also of the complicity of specific local
Puerto Rican economic and political actors with neoliberal policies. At the
same time, the crisis has given new visibility to a powerful and racist imperial
state and to the repression of radical Puerto Rican voices, a history that has
left indelible long-term effects on many lives.
     There are still euphemisms all over the place to cover the fact that Puerto
Rico has never had full control of its economic, environmental, and
communications policies. But thanks to the amazing investigative journalism
and work by activists, some of whom were present at Rutgers, it has been
sufficiently revealed that enormous problems had been swirling for years just
below the surface. And that after the turmoil of the debt crisis, the passing of
the Financial Control and Management Board Stability Act (known on the
island as PROMESA) in 2016 by the US Congress, and then Hurricane
María, there does not seem to be much left of the Estado Libre Asociado, or
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (both names are quite misleading). The
imposition of PROMESA and of the board (popularly known as La Junta)
constitute a decisive rebuttal to those who believed that the Estado Libre
Asociado, created in 1952, represented the decolonization of Puerto Rico.
     But perhaps it is no less true that disasters keep concealing as much as
they reveal. Such is the case with the decision faced by many Puerto Ricans
whether to stay or to leave the island. A new and massive exodus to the
United States, often of younger workers and professionals—as well as
families with children—has come into view. Indeed, since the mid-twentieth
century, the San Juan airport has acquired immense material and symbolic
power. It is a central site of memory. But in terms of current political
mobilization in the struggle for equal rights, what are the gains and losses of
leaving? To put this question is also to ask, What challenges lie ahead for
those who remain behind? Are their voices weakened or strengthened? One
should also take note of a change in the lived experience shared by many in
the diaspora and on the island. The magnitude of the crisis has brought a
transformative personal, political, and intellectual relationship with
individuals and activist groups, perhaps a new understanding of belonging. It
often includes a keen awareness of a larger and diverse community and a
bilingual translating relationship, into English or Spanish. All of this shows,
in a crucial respect, a new way of seeing and feeling that challenges
conventional definitions of identity. I keep thinking of the questions and
perspectives opened up by Albert O. Hirschman’s reflections on the ethical
and political dilemmas raised by Exit, Voice, and Loyalty.
    But something else, and most important, is happening on the ground as
Puerto Ricans struggle to assert their dignity. There is much to learn from
how many have found spiritual strength to cope with the ravages of disaster
capitalism, reimagining themselves in the face of traumatic loss of thousands
of lives and exploring their own vulnerabilities. Community leaders are
yearning not for epic confrontations but for a new sense of self and
community and for new political beginnings. Journalists, writers, and
academics are painstakingly describing how Puerto Ricans are transforming
their society in the long shadow of disasters. The scholars and journalists who
spoke at Rutgers—and others who have contributed essays for this volume—
have eagerly taken up the task of bringing dark truths of economic, social,
and environmental damage to light. They also bring critical perspectives to a
new memory of dispossession and a vision for the future.
    Who gets to tell the stories that need to be told? As a deeply committed
public intellectual, Yarimar Bonilla deserves the credit for imagining and
organizing the “Aftershocks” conference. She also deserves our gratitude.
Her breadth of vision, command of the issues, and firsthand knowledge of
academics and activists allowed her to bring together a wide range of
performance and visual artists, writers, journalists, photographers, academics,
documentary filmmakers, anthropologists, environmentalists, and legal
scholars. These are “voices that need to be heard,” as Bonilla said in her
opening remarks.
    The Rutgers meeting succeeded in creating a space for meaningful
dialogue and probing analyses of the consequences of disasters and political
disempowerment in Puerto Rico. It also illuminated multiple forms of
resistance. The word aftershocks became a rich metaphor, with many shades
of meaning. The dialogue was set in motion by two wonderful beginnings.
The first was the performance by a theater group from Puerto Rico; the
second was a memorable keynote conversation between Bonilla and Naomi
Klein.
    The play ¡Ay María! provided a moving and scathingly funny window
onto posthurricane lives. The characters circled each other and crossed paths
in a mosquito net, diluting the boundaries between the public and the private.
The interactive play captures the climate of frustration and the rage against
state agencies’ failures to even count the dead, and the imperial cynicism of
President Trump tossing out paper towels. ¡Ay María! shows how
vulnerabilities and hopes are embedded in a distinctive political and cultural
context in which beliefs, music, and dance can mobilize the community. The
characters are always in motion, telling stories, in conversation with the
audience, creating awareness of the present situation. Their movements and
voices, working around the personal and the local, were really speaking about
justice and democracy.
    I was extraordinarily impressed by the dialogue between Bonilla and the
distinguished political analyst Klein. Not only did they offer a deeply
thoughtful assessment of the aftershocks’ impact on Puerto Rico, but they
also posed essential questions for further investigation. Furthermore, in their
commentaries, they spoke with feeling and fullness of heart, remembering
colleagues, friends, other conversations, and their own political and affective
experiences on the island, thus setting the tone for the entire conference. It is
clear that Klein and Bonilla share the conviction that disasters open up new
possibilities for critical thinking and for art as a form of intervening in
politics and imagining a radically different society. Their words continue to
reverberate and inspire. We need that inspiration more than ever.
                          INTRODUCTION

                        Aftershocks of Disaster

               Yarimar Bonilla and Marisol LeBrón

“There’s no way to win. Those who stayed are suffering because of the
situation back home. But those who left are suffering because of the
circumstances under which they were forced to flee,” explained Isabel, a
thirty-year-old woman, to journalist Andrea González-Ramírez six months
after Hurricane María devastated Puerto Rico.1 The flooding caused by the
hurricane’s intense rainfalls forced Isabel, her husband, and her two young
children to take refuge in a local shelter. Isabel and her family spent the next
ten days in that shelter in Toa Baja with others whose homes had been
severely damaged or destroyed during the storm. After spending more than a
week in the emergency shelter, Isabel and her family, like thousands of others
in the coming weeks and months, decided to relocate to the United States.
They didn’t step foot in their house again before migrating to Florida, leaving
all their belongings behind. Although the family hoped that getting away
from the storm’s devastation would make their lives easier, Isabel soon
started to experience serious bouts of depression. The family moved a second
time, this time to Arizona, hoping that Isabel’s depression might improve in a
new location. But things only worsened for Isabel as she started to experience
panic attacks. The thought of never being able to return to Puerto Rico
seemed to be the biggest trigger for Isabel’s growing anxiety. “I left thinking
that we would be able to return. But there is no power, there are no jobs, so
the exodus keeps extending. Accepting that I will never go back is one of the
reasons that I’m facing issues with my mental health. We had the unrealistic
expectation that life would normalize in the island, but that’s not the case,”
Isabel said.2
    Isabel’s story provides a poignant example of how natural disasters do
more than just mar the landscape; they upend people’s lives, lingering and
reverberating long after the winds have died down and the waters have
calmed. In Isabel’s story, we see that the trauma she describes only worsened
with time. Her story complicates a linear timeline of disaster and recovery
and points instead to natural disasters as cumulative and ongoing. Isabel’s
anxiety stems from a realization that her life will never be the same—that the
Puerto Rico she knew will never be the same—but the storm accounts only in
part for that feeling of loss. Isabel laments that there are no jobs and that
more and more Puerto Ricans are leaving the island. These are realities that
long predated the storm but were worsened by its impact. Isabel suggests that
her expectation that things would get back to normal soon after the storm was
unrealistic, but this only raises the question whether the social problems that
plagued Puerto Rico before María aren’t also part of the disaster causing
Isabel’s breath to shorten and her chest to tighten.
    The concept of aftershocks is mostly used in the context of earthquakes to
describe the jolts felt after the initial quake. Aftershocks can continue for
days, weeks, months, and even years after the “main-shock.” The bigger the
earthquake, the more numerous and long-lasting the aftershocks will be.
Although aftershocks are often smaller, their effects can compound the
damage of the initial shock and create new urgencies that complicate
recovery efforts.
    Most of what is discussed in this book examines the aftershocks of
Hurricane María, not just the effects of the wind or rain but also what
followed: state failure, social abandonment, capitalization on human misery,
and the collective trauma produced by the botched response. In the nearly
two years since Hurricane María made landfall, Puerto Ricans have found
themselves relentlessly jolted by the storm’s aftershocks. This happens every
time systemic failures are revealed, death and damages are denied, aid is
refused, profiteering is discovered, and officials who were not elected by
local residents make drastic decisions about the island’s future. Much as we
see in Isabel’s case, these small but ongoing blows can have major
repercussions that are worse and potentially more destructive than the initial
event.
    Aftershocks remind us that disasters are not singular events but ongoing
processes. Building on this idea, Aftershocks of Disaster examines both
Hurricane María’s aftershocks and its foreshocks—the sociohistorical context
of debt crisis, migration, and coloniality in which the storm took place.
Indeed, we ask whether Hurricane María should be considered the
“mainshock” at all, or whether the storm and its effects are best understood as
the compounded results of a longer colonial history.



On September 20, 2017, Hurricane María sliced through Puerto Rico,
producing one of the deadliest natural disasters in US history and bringing
unprecedented attention to this colonial territory. For many in Puerto Rico, as
well as for those following the news from afar, one of the most searing
memories of the storm’s immediate aftermath is the press conference held by
US president Donald Trump in which he bragged about the storm’s low death
count. According to Trump, Hurricane María was not a “real catastrophe”
like Hurricane Katrina, which battered Louisiana and the Gulf Coast in 2005
and left eighteen hundred people dead. He boasted that in the case of María
only sixteen people had died thanks to the preparation and performance of
both the local and federal government. The official death tally began creeping
up immediately after his visit, eventually stalling at sixty-four. But reporters,
public health officials, funeral home directors, and Puerto Ricans who had
lost someone as a result of the storm all maintained that the true number had
to be much higher, given what they had witnessed and experienced. As Carla
Minet documents in her contribution to this volume, journalists from both
local and national outlets partnered together and, along with lawyers and
independent researchers, began revealing the truth of María’s fatal
consequences. In the end, the local government accepted 2,975 as the official
death toll, even though some studies place it much higher and there has yet to
be a definitive accounting.
     On September 12, 2018, only a few days before the first anniversary of
the storm’s landfall in Puerto Rico, Trump tweeted that the revised death toll
was little more than a partisan conspiracy theory. Local politicians, for their
part, have accepted the higher numbers but refuse to account for their
mishandling of death certifications, reported cremations without autopsies,
and the broader forms of structural negligence that caused the deaths in the
first place. We now know that the great majority of those who lost their lives
to María perished not because of the storm but because of the structural
failures that followed it: uncleared roads that did not allow ambulances to
arrive, lack of water distribution that led residents to contaminated water
sources, lack of generators in hospitals, and more than half a year without
electricity to power medical equipment, refrigerate lifesaving medications
such as insulin, and provide public lighting and traffic lights to prevent
deadly accidents. Lives were not lost to the wind and the rain, or even to
Trump’s disrespect; instead, residents drowned in bureaucracy and
institutional neglect.
    Further, in the weeks and months spent waiting for the power to come
back on, or worrying about whether the water they were giving their children
was safe to consume, or wondering if they were going to be able to go back
to work or school, many Puerto Ricans were stricken with anxiety, fear, and a
deep feeling of abandonment, which exacerbated an often hidden mental
health crisis on the island. Suicides spiked after the storm, as did cases of
domestic and intimate partner violence. Suicides increased 28 percent in
2017, while calls to suicide prevention hotlines doubled from September
2017 to March 2018.3 Groups working with women and families
experiencing domestic violence and intimate abuse also reported a surge in
requests for services and preventive educational programs.4 As journalist and
activist Mari Mari Narváez notes in her interview with Marisol LeBrón in this
volume, marginalized populations only found their vulnerability intensified
as the state struggled to provide even the most basic resources and
protections.
    In this context, it is difficult to predict when the disaster associated with
Hurricane María will actually end since each aftershock creates a new series
of problems that ripple out far and wide. Nor is it even clear when this
disaster began. Long before María, Puerto Rico was already suffering the
effects of a prolonged economic recession, spiraling levels of debt, and deep
austerity cuts to public resources. This was preceded by over five centuries of
colonialism (first Spanish, then American) and a long history of structural
vulnerability and forced dependency. For example, Puerto Rico’s weakened
local government is subject to the whims of Washington and thus unable to
chart political and economic policy centered around local needs (a case in
point being the inability to repeal the Jones Act, which requires all consumer
goods to arrive on US vessels, drastically raising the cost of basic need
items). Moreover, its social safety nets are constrained by the structural
inequalities between the United States and its territories. All of this results in
depressed wages, restricted social security and Medicare benefits, and a
poverty rate that is more than twice the national average. These structural
vulnerabilities, as contributors to this volume demonstrate, set the stage for
María’s impact.


                   COLONIAL DEBT AND DISASTER

Long before the hurricane, Puerto Rico felt to many like a society in ruin—
financially and politically. During the past two decades, this US territory was
plunged into a deep economic recession as tax incentives for foreign
companies were phased out. Companies left in droves in search of less
regulation and greater corporate welfare. Almost immediately unemployment
started to increase, public coffers dwindled, residents were told to tighten
their belts, and many began migrating in greater numbers in search of
economic stability and opportunity.
     Puerto Rico’s public debt, which eventually grew to more than $72
billion, helped lay the groundwork that made Hurricane María so devastating
and the recovery so slow. The debt ballooned as Puerto Rican officials turned
to Wall Street to address the economic stagnation that followed corporate
flight, increasingly taking on greater debt in an attempt to stay afloat.
     Puerto Rico’s debt crisis was also fueled by the particular financial
apparatus of Puerto Rican bonds. In addition to having repayment guaranteed
in the constitution, bonds issued by the Puerto Rican government also have
the unique and singular quality (unavailable within any of the fifty states) of
being triple tax-exempt—free of tax obligations at the state, federal, or local
level. This made them irresistible to Wall Street financiers. When debt levels
pushed beyond constitutional limits, new mechanisms of economic capture
were created. A sales tax suggested by financial strategists at Lehman
Brothers was implemented in 2006 to guarantee new loans. Meanwhile,
public infrastructure (such as airports, bridges, and hospitals) was
increasingly sold to the highest bidder, further eroding public coffers.5 As a
result about one-third of Puerto Rico’s budget is now funneled toward
servicing a debt that many believe is both unconstitutional and
unsustainable.6 Puerto Rico’s contemporary debt crisis, however, is a
symptom of a much deeper economic and political malaise stemming from its
unresolved colonial status. After the establishment in 1952 of the Estado
Libre Asociado (Freely Associated State, often glossed in English as the
“commonwealth”), Puerto Rico was imagined to have “the best of both
worlds”: it had a semblance of local sovereignty, backed by the economic and
political protections that came with ties to the United States.
    During the mid-twentieth century, Puerto Rico went from being the
“poorhouse of the Caribbean” to the “shining star” of US democracy in the
region, as the island was rapidly industrialized and the standard of living
increased for many Puerto Ricans. The gains seemingly achieved through
Puerto Rico’s commonwealth status caused many to ignore fundamental
flaws in this political-economic arrangement. Puerto Rico’s territorial status
prevents the local government from shaping and implementing many of its
own policies, encourages an overdependence on US capital investment, and
hampers long-term and sustainable economic growth that would benefit the
local population. This makes Puerto Rico particularly vulnerable during
periods of economic contraction, and, indeed, for the past two decades, many
residents have felt that they were already living in a state of crisis. By the
time the debt crisis hit, local and federal policy makers had seemingly run out
of options for staving off collapse.
    In an effort to stop Puerto Rico’s debt “death spiral,” the local
government declared the debt “unpayable” in 2016 and signed an emergency
bill placing a moratorium on debt payments.7 When the local government
sought to declare bankruptcy, the real nature of Puerto Rico’s limited
sovereignty became clear. With the legal status of neither a state nor an
independent nation, Puerto Rico could not refinance or default on its debt.
The US Congress denied Puerto Rico not only the right to bankruptcy but
also any kind of financial bailout or meaningful redress. Instead, Congress
“assisted” Puerto Rico by imposing the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management,
and Economic Stability Act, or PROMESA bill, which established an
unelected Fiscal Control Board to manage local finances and renegotiate the
debt. The board is colloquially referred to as “la Junta” by locals, which
signals many Puerto Ricans’ perception of the board as a dictatorial body that
has seized power from the local government.
    The members of the Fiscal Control Board were appointed by the US
Congress with virtually no local input and no form of local accountability, yet
all costs are paid directly by Puerto Rican taxpayers to the tune of $200
million a year.8 According to the current president of the Fiscal Control
Board, José B. Carrión III, the fact that the board does not have to answer to
either the Puerto Rican government or to local citizens is precisely what
allows it to make unpopular choices that are necessary to improve Puerto
Rico’s economy.9
    The board has no vision for the island’s future other than restoring its
ability to continue borrowing and generating profit for investors. It has
focused solely on imposing structural-adjustment-style austerity measures,
even after many international monetary institutions, including the
International Monetary Fund, have admitted that these policies are
shortsighted and doomed to fail.10 The board’s failure to invest in the well-
being and livelihoods of local Puerto Ricans is evident in its initial targeting
of public education—including the University of Puerto Rico, as Rima Brusi
and Isar Godreau detail in their essay—and the imposition of drastic cuts to
pensions and wages.
    Given all this, Puerto Rico was already in a state of political and social
crisis long before the winds of María arrived. Protests against PROMESA
were taking place across the territory, student strikes had shut down the
university for months, abandoned schools and foreclosed buildings were
being taken over as community centers, and across the urban landscape new
street art appeared calling for a reimagining of what decolonization and self-
determination might look like for a bankrupt colony. Activists had already
come together to tell the government “se acabaron las promesas” (the time for
promises is over), a slogan that evokes both the PROMESA law and the
decades of false promises that had followed the establishment of Puerto
Rico’s commonwealth status.
    For young people in particular, the economic advancement and social
freedoms promised by the commonwealth arrangement proved to be empty
promises as insecurity, precarity, and vulnerability marked their lives and
increasingly constrained their futures. They worried that their lives were
essentially being mortgaged to service the debt and generate profits for
vulture capitalists. Education, well-paying jobs, affordable housing, and the
ability to build one’s life in Puerto Rico were increasingly out of grasp for
many Puerto Rican youth, who faced a stark choice: either migrate to the
United States or deal with dwindling opportunities on the island. Raquel
Salas Rivera captures this uncertainty and frustration in her poem
“sinverguenza with no nation”; evoking the rage of Allen Ginsburg’s epic
poem “Howl,” she tells us, “i saw the best souls of my generation /swallowed
by colonialism.”
    While current residents feel increasingly pushed towards exile, the
government has focused on attracting new “stakeholders” to come to Puerto
Rico under Act 20/22, a pivotal piece of legislation that allows wealthy elites
from the United States to use Puerto Rico as a tax haven. Passed in 2012, the
legislation was created to bring capital investment to the island once it was
barred from borrowing. Government officials promised that these
newcomers, lured by seductive tax breaks, would invest in the local economy
and create jobs. Under the statute, transplants from the United States who
spend half the year on the island can receive exemptions from federal and
local taxes, capital gains tax, and taxes on passive income until the year 2035,
regardless of whether they generate employment or invest in the local
economy. This makes Puerto Rico the only place under US jurisdiction where
such income can go untaxed.11 Of course, this is available only to “new
arrivals,” not current residents or those originally born in the territory who
migrated and might wish to return. The trickle-down logic of Act 20/22,
however, failed to make any positive impact on the lives of the majority of
Puerto Ricans and only fueled the growth of hyper-segregated elite foreign
enclaves around the island.
    The economic crisis had thus already set the stage for what Puerto Ricans
could and would come to expect after María. The public services and
infrastructure that failed with deadly results during and after Hurricane María
were already severely weakened after being deprived of the funds necessary
to perform even minimal maintenance, let alone desperately needed upgrades.
While public infrastructure continued to deteriorate, these forms of state
abandonment normalized the idea of individual responsibility in the face of
state retreat. As a result, in the days after María—while the local government
was MIA, the power grid collapsed, and communication systems all failed—
local residents fended for themselves. As Ana Portnoy Brimmer puts it in her
poem “If a Tree Falls in an Island: The Metaphysics of Colonialism,” there
was a feeling that while Puerto Ricans struggled to make themselves heard,
“only the ocean responds/with a swallow.”
    Refusing to be swallowed up and disappeared by inaction and silence,
Puerto Ricans continued to shout their truth and take recovery into their own
hands. Families, neighbors, coworkers, congregations, and groups that were
already working together on social issues, as well as others who weren’t,
began coming together into self-described “brigades” to clear out roads, bring
food and water to the forgotten and the vulnerable, distribute tarps, and
eventually build roofs and homes. All the while state aid, both local and
federal, refused to arrive.
    Activists’ efforts in the wake of María drew from and amplified
grassroots organizing that predated the storm. This organizing was already
focused on supporting individuals and communities in the face of prolonged
economic and social crises. The notion that only the people would and could
save the people—that the state could not meaningfully improve the lives of
Puerto Ricans under the current political and economic structure—was
already guiding the work of many activists and organizations, as poignantly
demonstrated in the contributions by Giovanni Roberto, Arturo Massol, Mari
Mari Narváez, and Sarah Molinari. These grassroots efforts have taken on a
new urgency and necessity after Hurricane María as Puerto Ricans are forced
to deal with not only the physical destruction caused by the storm but also the
further destabilization of many communities as the government failed to act
or acted in ways that only exacerbated vulnerability.
    Two years after the storm, local residents continue to mend their society.
They have come together to deal with the long-term issues of the slow
recovery—lack of public lighting, unrepaired infrastructure, denials of
FEMA assistance and insurance claims, and the loss of thousands of jobs—
that have forced many to reimagine their lives, often beyond the geographic
bounds of the Puerto Rican territory. Meanwhile, the local government
claims it is open for business and continues to lure new arrivals with the
promise of tax incentives, government contracts from emergency funds, and
the assurance of a “resilient” population that can continue to adapt to the
challenges that lie ahead. While the local government is working to sell post-
María Puerto Rico as a blank slate onto which millionaire investors can
project their wildest fantasies of unrestricted capital growth, Puerto Ricans on
the island and in the diaspora are drawing from a rich history of resistance to
construct a Puerto Rico for Puerto Ricans and deal with the storm’s
continuing aftershocks.


           FROM DISASTER TO DECOLONIAL FUTURES
Building from the premise that Hurricane María is not a singular event, the
contributors to this volume document the many shocks that Puerto Ricans
have endured before and after the storm. Through reportage, poetry, personal
narrative, and scholarly investigation, they show that the effects of Hurricane
María are best understood as the product of a long-standing colonial disaster.
The events unfolding in Puerto Rico appear to be following the familiar
scripts of “disaster capitalism,” for-profit recovery, and economic austerity
that have been deployed in other parts of the world. Yet, as Yarimar Bonilla
and Naomi Klein discuss in the dialogue that opens the volume, these policies
take on a particular hue in the context of Puerto Rico. As Klein argues, in
most disaster-struck societies, moments of crisis are viewed as opportunities
for social and economic engineering. In the case of Puerto Rico, however,
there was no need for elites to scramble to take advantage of new
opportunities because there was already an infrastructure of dispossession
and displacement firmly in place. Because of the financial crisis, a Fiscal
Control Board had already been instituted by Congress to expedite economic
transformation. Moreover, given Puerto Rico’s colonial history, the board
easily wielded neoliberal technologies—such as tax loopholes and financial
incentives for foreign capital along with the fast-tracked privatization of local
resources—characteristic of an economic system geared toward extracting
wealth and catering to foreigners. For Klein and Bonilla, this is why since
María the government has shown such little interest in creating new social
and economic models for Puerto Rico, turning instead to the well-trodden
paths of extractive Caribbean economies, with mere cosmetic updates for the
digital age.
    It is partly for this reason that Nelson Maldonado-Torres closes the book
by asking us to consider whether María is truly a crisis, which he describes as
a moment that requires a critical decision, or a disaster: a moment when
decisions seem to have already been made and fates tragically cast.
Maldonado-Torres is not the only one to point to the deep historical roots of
María’s disaster and the role of colonialism in defining its outcomes.
    Several of the contributors in the volume describe what can be called the
coloniality of disaster, that is, the way the structures and enduring legacies of
colonialism set the stage for María’s impact and its aftermath. For example,
Frances Negrón-Muntaner examines how a liberal rhetoric of inclusion in
which Puerto Ricans are framed as “fellow Americans” sought to make
Puerto Rican suffering legible and worthy of moral outrage by the American
public. Yet these accounts ultimately entrench the divisions between Puerto
Ricans as a minoritized group and those “real” Americans called upon to
care.
    Similarly, Hilda Lloréns shows how deep-seated racio-colonial tropes
shape the way Puerto Ricans are depicted as “climate refugees” in the midst
of a massive exodus from the island. Lloréns argues that these depictions play
on the long-standing idea of Puerto Rico as part of the “disastrous tropics,”
an idea that functions not only to occlude the role of US colonialism in
shaping and creating disasters but also to position migration to the United
States as a salvation for Puerto Ricans rather than another form of disastrous
uncertainty. Both Chris Gregory and Erika Rodríguez discuss how local
photojournalists tried to push back against these representations by using
different photographic techniques, refusing to reproduce the traditional visual
scripts of victimhood in disaster reportage. Rodríguez, who was working on a
photo series exploring how the colonial relationship between the United
States and Puerto Rico has shaped Puerto Rican identity, addresses how this
thread remained in her work while covering the storm. She says she felt a
responsibility to document the dignity of Puerto Ricans “beyond the loudness
of the disaster,” in order to combat precisely the kinds of historical tropes that
Lloréns traces. Similarly, Gregory’s use of portraiture, his compositions, and
his choice of subjects contest representations of Puerto Ricans as mere
hapless victims of nature. At the same time, the palpable sorrow evident in
his representations—conveyed through not just portraiture but also
landscapes and still lifes—hints at the complex emotional fabric of post-
María Puerto Rico.
    As many contributors demonstrate, the particular trauma experienced in
Puerto Rico after María is deeply tied to a longer preexisting colonial trauma.
Several of the contributors point to how María’s impact on the local psyche
pushes us to think more critically about questions of dependency, self-
sufficiency, sustainability, and sovereignty. Both Benjamín Torres Gotay and
Eduardo Lalo suggest that Puerto Ricans’ feelings of abandonment and the
trauma experienced in the face of governmental and imperial neglect are
rooted so deeply in colonial logics that they become “unnameable,” as Lalo
puts it. Torres Gotay describes how local residents seemed almost incapable
of recognizing and assimilating the abandonment they experienced. In the
face of FEMA’s denials and the state’s retreat, residents offered up narratives
of resignation, repeatedly asserting that things “could be worse” and that, all
things considered, they were OK. Torres Gotay roots this dissonance in the
contradictory imperial narratives that Puerto Ricans have been fed about their
place within a US empire.
    Recognizing the long-standing and historically informed nature of trauma
in different Puerto Rican communities, activists and scholars such as Patricia
Noboa stress the importance of providing not only economic and legal
assistance but also psychotherapeutic accompaniment. Noboa offers a
compelling ethnographic description of how marginalized communities, long
accustomed to state abandonment, deal with losses that extend far beyond the
material. She shows that while some mental health professionals focus solely
on the specific trauma of María, the storm triggered connections to past
traumas that remain unmentioned and unrecognized for many. Noboa also
challenges the discourse of “Puerto Rico se levanta” (Puerto Rico will rise)
that emerged after the storm. She notes that such rhetoric pathologizes the
difficulties of overcoming trauma as a result of individual shortcomings and a
lack of resilience while failing to hold the state accountable for the structural
violence that predated the storm.
    Many contributors point to the difficulty of narrating this trauma. As Lalo
suggests, some writers can only point toward what cannot be put into words.
We see this absence of language throughout the texts. For example, Beatriz
Llenin Figueroa’s contribution is a Hurricane diary that never was, a
chronicle that remains unwritten. Sofia Gallisá offers a series of lists that seek
to take inventory of what was lost; as fragmented shards of testimony, they
cannot be fully sutured into a narrative whole. In her contribution, Carla
Minet discusses how local journalists dealt with the lack of transparency and
accountability, particularly in regards to the death count, which for many
remains an unforgivable act of government deception. While the dedicated
work of journalists, lawyers, and activists has helped us start to grasp the
scope of the storm’s human impact, Minet reminds us that a total accounting
of the storm’s effects remains painfully elusive. Noboa suggests that even in
the face of these unnameable experiences, it is important to listen, to witness,
and to create spaces of narration. Rather than promoting a frenzied rush
toward “recovery” without assessing what was experienced, what was lost,
and what was transformed, these contributors encourage us to dwell in
fractured narratives that emerged from Hurricane María and its aftermath,
suggesting that even in their incompleteness these fragmented tales reveal
powerful, if difficult, truths.
    In the face of these silences and dissimulations, the arts take on a role of
central importance in helping us understand the effects of the storm and its
aftershocks. The play ¡Ay María!, which was performed around the island in
the immediate aftermath of the hurricane, was produced by a group of
independent actors as a way of coping with their own personal experiences of
the storm. It showcases the full range of human experiences that
characterized everyday life during the storm, from the poignant to the absurd.
Marianne Ramírez and Carlos Rivera Santana also provide chronicles of
artistic efforts that emerged after María both in the island and the diaspora.
Rivera Santana details how visual art has become an important site of
catharsis as Puerto Ricans confront the effects of both natural and man-made
disaster. In her essay, Ramírez discusses how visual artists have been
engaging with the longue durée of colonialism in Puerto Rico and using their
art to assert a decolonial aesthetic and cultural sovereignty. Meanwhile,
Richard Santiago offers a firsthand account of the pain and difficulty of
becoming an artist in exile. Santiago also shows the importance of the arts in
revealing ugly and painful truths that the government seeks to keep invisible,
such as the death and human devastation that occurred in the storm’s
aftermath. Lastly, Adrian Roman describes his experience as an artist from
the diaspora traveling to his family’s hometown in order to gather and
preserve the discarded pieces of broken lives. These artworks once again
point to a collective experience that cannot be fully expressed in words, much
less in a political program.
    Multiple contributors show that María is not just about economic
exploitation and social inequalities, but also about a deepening crisis of
imagination. In the face of immediate matters of life and death it can be
difficult to think beyond the current political binds toward new collective
possibilities. In her essay, historian Mónica Jiménez encourages us to look to
the past in order to rediscover revolutionary impulses that can help us think
about solutions to the problems confronting contemporary Puerto Rico.
Jiménez examines how the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party and its leader,
Pedro Albizu Campos, when confronted with economic instability and
natural disaster during the early twentieth century, warned against relying on
the United States to provide solutions. Instead, they argued that Puerto Ricans
needed to assert an economic and political sovereignty in the face of colonial
immiserization. Indeed, we see in Jiménez’s contribution as well as others’ in
this collection that the past is prologue not only to the current crisis but also
to the kinds of radical political thinking needed to build new futures.
    Throughout the volume, contributors demand something more than a
mere recovery, if by recovery we are to understand a return to a previous
state of affairs. In a number of pieces we see bold calls to break with the
reigning social, political, and economic structures that produce disasters and
that continue to rock Puerto Rican society. In the contributions by Ed
Morales, Natasha Brannana, and Eva Prado we see how local activists are
pushing to reimagine the ties of obligation and debt that bind Puerto Rico to
the United States through a critical interrogation of the fiscal crisis. Sarah
Molinari describes how residents came together to feed their communities,
clean up their surroundings, and lend each other support in the face of
bureaucratic violence. Sandra Rodríguez Cotto narrates how in the face of
both a governmental and telecommunications collapse, a small community
radio station was able to provide comfort and community to those who were
left alone in the dark. Mari Mari Narváez calls on Puerto Ricans to apply
relentless pressure on both the local and federal governments to act in more
accountable and transparent ways. She argues that only by centering the
needs and desires of Puerto Ricans will Puerto Rico be able to meaningfully
function as a free and democratic society. Both Arturo Massol and Giovanni
Roberto examine how the search for new social relations in Puerto Rico is
about not just self-sufficiency but also moving from mutual support toward
new forms of collective self-determination. This shift requires healing the
many traumas and shocks that Puerto Ricans have faced, including the
displacement and dispossession felt by the millions of Puerto Ricans who
have found themselves, by choice or circumstance, forging their lives beyond
the geographic confines of the Puerto Rican archipelago.
    Overall, the contributors to this volume ask us to consider what it would
truly mean for Puerto Rico to recover from the devastation of Hurricane
María. Is recovery simply measured by a return to the conditions that marked
life in Puerto Rico before the storm? If so, that would mean a return to the
status quo of extraction and exploitation necessary for colonial capitalism to
function. The essays that follow suggest that this would represent not a
recovery but simply the continuation of a colonial disaster. Ultimately,
Hurricane María forces us to reckon with not only the disastrous effects of
climate change, particularly on already vulnerable people, but also the need
for decolonization to serve as the centerpiece of a just recovery for Puerto
Rico and the Caribbean as a whole.
1. Andrea González-Ramírez, “Life, Interrupted: The Invisible Scars Hurricane María
    Has Left on the Women of Puerto Rico,” Refinery 29, March 19, 2018,
    https://www.refinery29.com/en-us/2018/03/193315/women-mental-health-puerto-rico-
    hurricane-maria.
2. Andrea González-Ramírez, “Life, Interrupted.”
3. Departamento de Salud, “Estadísticas Preliminares de Casos de Suicidio Puerto Rico,
    Enero—Diciembre,           2017,”      http://www.salud.gov.pr/Estadisticas-Registros-y-
    Publicaciones/Estadisticas%20Suicidio/Diciembre%202017.pdf                          and
    https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2018/03/23/mental-health-crisis-puerto-rico-
    hurricane-María/447144002/.
4. Andrea González-Ramírez, “After Hurricane María, A Hidden Crisis of Violence
    against Women in Puerto Rico,” September 19, 2018, https://www.refinery29.com/en-
    us/2018/09/210051/domestic-violence-puerto-rico-hurricane-maria-effects-
    anniversary; Claire Tighe and Lauren Gurley, “Official Reports of Violence Against
    Women in Puerto Rico Unreliable After Hurricane María,” Centro de Periodismo
    Investigavo, May 7, 2018, http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2018/05/official-reports-
    of-violence-against-women-in-puerto-rico-unreliable-after-hurricane-maria/.
5. Jeremy Scahill, “Hurricane Colonialism: The Economic, Political, and Environmental
    War on Puerto Rico,” Intercepted, podcast audio, September 19, 2018,
    https://theintercept.com/2018/09/19/hurricane-colonialism-the-economic-political-and-
    environmental-war-on-puerto-rico/.
6. US Department of Treasury, “Puerto Rico’s Economic and Fiscal Crisis,”
    https://www.treasury.gov/connect/blog/Documents/Puerto_Ricos_fiscal_challenges.pdf.
7. Mary Williams Walsh, “Puerto Rico’s Governor Warns of Fiscal ‘Death Spiral,’” New
    York                 Times,                October              14,               2016,
    https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/15/business/dealbook/puerto-rico-financial-
    oversight-board.html; EFE, “Pasan ley de Emergencia Fiscal,” El Nuevo Herald, April
    6, 2016, https://www.elnuevoherald.com/noticias/finanzas/article70337262.html
8. Luis J. Valentin Ortiz, “Una Pueblo Quebrado, una Quiebra Costosa,” Centro de
    Periodismo              Investigativo,          November             1,           2018,
    http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2018/11/un-pueblo-quebrado-unaquiebra-costosa/.
9. Shereen Marisol Meraji, “Puerto Rico’s Other Storm,” CodeSwitch, September 19,
    2018, https://www.npr.org/templates/transcript/transcript.php?storyId=649228215.
10. Larry Elliot, “Austerity Policies Do More Harm than Good, IMF Study Concludes,”
    Guardian,                        May                      27,                     2016,
    https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/27/austerity-policies-do-more-harm-
    than-good-imf-study-concludes.
11. Jesse Barron, “How Puerto Rico Became the Newest Tax Haven for the Super Rich,”
    GQ, September 18, 2018, https://www.gq.com/story/how-puerto-rico-became-tax-
    haven-for-super-rich.
PART I
Openings
                  THE TRAUMA DOCTRINE

                    A Conversation between
                Yarimar Bonilla and Naomi Klein

YARIMAR BONILLA. I wanted to start by asking you to speak about your
decision to write directly about Puerto Rico. You’ve written indirectly, and
perhaps not even knowingly, about Puerto Rico for so many years. Your
work has been so important for thinking about what’s happening in Puerto
Rico, not just in terms of María but also in terms of the debt crisis and the
various political and economic transformations taking place there. What I
particularly want to hear is your perspective as a non–Puerto Rican and as
someone who has thought about these issues on a global scale. What is the
particularity of Puerto Rico for thinking about the broader issues of disaster
capitalism and the shock doctrine? What role does colonialism play in giving
these relationships a particular hue?

NAOMI KLEIN. When I was in Puerto Rico researching this book, we also
made this short film that you referenced.1 I worked with a wonderful
cinematographer named Christian Carretero. He often referred to María as
“our teacher.” He said, “María was a very strict teacher—we learned a lot
about how we’re living. The weaknesses of that, the vulnerabilities of that.”
Many painful lessons that I know we’re going to be talking about. I just want
to acknowledge that many of my teachers are in this room. The people who
gave me a crash course in colonialism as it has impacted Puerto Rico in these
five hundred years. You [Yarimar] are one of these key teachers, and you are
quoted in the book and the film. I begin the book with Arturo Massol, with
this beacon that is Casa Pueblo—this pink house lit up because they had solar
panels on their roof and had another model for community-controlled and
community-owned renewable energy. Eva Prado, who leads the movement
calling for an audit of Puerto Rico’s debt, was so patient when I met her in
Puerto Rico and also as I was writing the book in helping me understand the
illegality and the odious nature of Puerto Rico’s debt.
    Your question about the particularity—every place is particular. Many of
the places where I have studied this process that I call the “shock doctrine” or
“disaster capitalism” have a very painful history of colonialism and slavery.
We have these intersecting forces … I think that the place that the particular
intersections and layering of crises remind me the most of when I think about
Puerto Rico, is New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. People were talking
about a “natural disaster,” but of course there was nothing natural about it.
You had this storm that was supercharged by climate change slamming into
infrastructure that was deliberately neglected. You remember the warnings,
“Repair the levees, repair the levees.” And the levees weren’t repaired
because the people on the other side of those levees were considered
disposable. They were the poorest people in New Orleans. Then you had the
layering of white supremacy on top of that; you turn on Fox News and there
was this animalization of the victims who had been abandoned in the
Superdome. All these lies that were perpetuated in right-wing media about
“they’re raping babies,” and so on. I think there were a lot of parallels.
    One of the things that made it different was what I call in The Battle for
Paradise “shock after shock doctrine.” I’ll read a quote that I use in the Shock
Doctrine. It’s a useful one from Milton Friedman, the architect of neoliberal
economics in many ways. He wrote this in 1980: “Only a crisis, actual or
perceived, produces real change. When that crisis occurs, the actions that are
taken depend on the ideas lying around. That, I believe, is our basic function.
To develop alternatives to existing policies, to keep them alive and available
until the politically impossible becomes politically inevitable.”
    Natalie Jaresko, the executive director of the Fiscal Control Board in
Puerto Rico, was interviewed by NPR recently, and the interviewer asked
her, as somebody coming from Eastern Europe, what lessons she brought to
Puerto Rico, and she said, “The lessons I think I bring to this are to use the
moment of crisis—this fiscal crisis, this hurricane crisis. Use the political will
in the moment to do the most that you can to change the structure of the
economy.”2 That’s a pretty clear articulation of the shock doctrine. In these
moments you usually have a scramble to come up with those ideas, but in
Puerto Rico the ideas were all ready to go, because of the preexisting debt
crisis.
     For instance, with Katrina, there was an emergency meeting at the
Heritage Foundation two weeks after the levees broke. It was chaired by
Mike Pence, who was then the head of the Republican study group that was
the right-wing caucus on Capitol Hill. It had all the right-wing think tanks,
like the American Enterprise Institute. They came up with a wish list. The
waters had not yet receded in New Orleans, and they came up with a list:
don’t open the public schools, give parents vouchers that they can use in
private schools, support the creation of charter schools, close the public
housing projects, have a tax-free free enterprise zone. You go down the list,
and there’s thirty-five of what they call “free market solutions” to Hurricane
Katrina and high gas prices—they just tacked on the high gas prices, by the
way. It’s an unbelievable list, because on this list, they say, “Open up the
Arctic Wildlife Refuge to oil drilling” … what the hell is that doing on the
list? What’s amazing about it is that you have this crisis that comes from the
intersection of climate change—this superstorm—and a deliberately
weakened and neglected public sphere. And the solution is to do away with
the public sphere and supercharge climate change by digging up more oil.
Just do everything you can to make it worse.
     One of the things that’s different with Puerto Rico is that that
infrastructure of crisis exploitation didn’t need to be scrambled together and
there didn’t need to be a brainstorming session, because the Fiscal Control
Board, locally referred to as “la Junta,” was already in place. They already
had all the policies; they didn’t need to do any more planning. All they
needed was the bloody-minded opportunism to push it through. Not
harnessing political will, that’s a lie; it’s harnessing trauma, the state of
emergency, the fact that people are just struggling to stay alive, and using that
dislocation to ram through a preexisting, totally articulated agenda. This is
why we heard about the push to privatize electricity after Irma, before María
even made landfall.
     You asked specifically about colonialism. One of the most powerful
things I heard when I was researching this book was from somebody named
Juan Rosario, who some of you know is a longtime environmental activist
and labor activist in Puerto Rico. He talked about how colonialism is a war
on the imagination, and how in these moments when you have opportunistic
players coming in with their ideas for their “Puertopia” and plans for further
privatization and deregulation, the legacy of colonialism has made it very
difficult for Puerto Ricans themselves to come in and say, “No, this is our
plan.” But when I was there, I found that there was more confidence than in
any place I’ve ever studied, to come together with a plan—with a people’s
plan. And you [Yarimar] mentioned Junte Gente,3 and that’s why I decided
to do the book, so we could get money to this coalition—not nearly enough,
but some. It is so remarkable; whether New Orleans after Katrina or Iraq after
the invasion, I’ve certainly seen a remarkable ability of people under
extraordinary circumstances to come together and say no to the shock
doctrine, to disaster capitalism. But what I’ve never seen before is what I saw
in Mariana, which was a meeting in a community that still didn’t have
electricity, except for the solar panels they put up themselves, that still didn’t
have water, that was still feeding itself in a community kitchen.4 Where the
schools were still closed. For people to come together under those dire
circumstances and try to come up with a political program. It hasn’t come
together as fast as some people would like, but it is still extraordinary,
absolutely extraordinary, that people were able to engage in that level of
forward-looking organizing in the midst of an ongoing disaster. And that has
to do with, I think, the infrastructure of resistance to colonialism and to the
Junta.
    I want to throw it to you, Yarimar, because you know so much more
about this than me. And when we met in San Juan and I interviewed you for
this, what struck me most was that you were in a really unique position to
document and theorize this layering of multiple shocks because you were
already engaged in this research before María hit. You were able to go back
to some of the people with whom you were already discussing how the
economic crisis and the debt crisis was being exploited. You were able to go
back to them and ask, “So now what is María doing to your life?” Your book
is yet to be published—it’s going to be incredible—I’m very excited about it.
But, I would love for you to share some of what you’ve learned in the early
stages in those conversations that were punctuated and interrupted by María.

YARIMAR BONILLA. I had been doing research in Puerto Rico since 2015,
and originally, my project was about the statehood movement in Puerto Rico.
I was interested in doing an ethnographic study of those who imagine that
making Puerto Rico the fifty-first state of the United States is the best option
for decolonizing Puerto Rico. It’s a political movement that has not been
seriously studied, and in particular, it has not been analyzed as an anticolonial
option. I was also interested in using the statehood movement to turn a mirror
onto the United States, to open up the question of why the United States
acquired territories that were from their origins not destined for full inclusion
—in other words, how and why the United States became a colonial empire
that refuses to recognize itself as such.
     As I was working on that project, the fiscal crisis, which had been
unfolding, was publicly announced. The governor declared that Puerto Rico
was in a debt spiral, the PROMESA law was passed, and the fiscal board was
appointed—the antidemocratic Junta that was now deciding the fate of Puerto
Rico. Moreover, a series of Supreme Court cases in 2016 made Puerto Rico’s
colonial status and the limits of its sovereignty more apparent. At that time,
there were dovetailing discussions about the economic crisis and “the death
of the ELA,” the Estado Libre Asociado, or commonwealth status. For many,
the economic crisis represented the end of the mirage of prosperity that the
ELA represented. The recognition by the Supreme Court that Puerto Ricans
did not have self-government, not even the ability to declare themselves
bankrupt, was the final nail on the coffin. There were even performative
funeral rites that were held with demonstrators symbolically carrying the
ELA in a casket. And spontaneously many artists and activists began creating
murals, T-shirts, and placards featuring the Puerto Rican flag painted in
black. For some this represented a symbol of mourning, while for others it
was a sign of a new era of resistance.
     I thus became interested in thinking about the current moment as one of
“political death.” My focus thus expanded beyond the statehood movement to
think more broadly about the economic crisis in Puerto Rico as also a
moment of political crisis. Indeed, part of the problem with colonialism is
that in Puerto Rico, it’s locked us into a set of options none of which fully
represent what Puerto Ricans really want, but which at the same time limit
our ability to think beyond them. As Christine Nieves Rodriguez, an activist
from the Barrio Mariana in Puerto Rico, once stated: “Puerto Rico’s greatest
crisis right now is its crisis of imagination.”
     I left Puerto Rico three days before Irma, and I arrived in New York with
a writing fellowship and an outline of the book I was going to write about
Puerto Rico’s political and economic crisis. Then Irma hit, and then María
hit. Of course, given the work I had been doing, I was primed to think about
the hurricanes in relationship to the political and economic transformations
already underway in Puerto Rico. My focus since has thus not been on what
María has caused, but what it has revealed: centuries of colonialism, decades
of economic crisis, and deep forms of structural and infrastructural neglect.
    It’s important to keep in mind that these issues were already being
challenged before the storms. In 2017 Puerto Rico had the largest May 1
demonstrations in years, and there were already many new forms of activism
building against austerity, against the debt, against the Junta. María
reshuffled a lot of those efforts, but people were able to move quickly and to
engage in important political and social actions immediately after the storm
precisely because of that already-existing political momentum.
    It’s partly because of this that I argue that what we see in Puerto Rico is
not a shock doctrine but a trauma doctrine: this is not a case of economic and
political interests taking advantage of a moment of shock, but rather of
corporate and political interests taking advantage of deep-seated colonial
traumas that have left the population vulnerable to exploitation, all too
accustomed to abandonment and self-reliance. The much-touted resilience of
Puerto Ricans thus needs to be itself understood as a form of trauma: years of
abandonment by local and federal governments have forced communities to
take care of themselves. I think this is why people were able to move so
quickly and to immediately begin thinking about alternatives at the
community level. This is wonderful but also troubling, given the superhuman
capacity for resilience that is now expected of residents.
    That’s part of why I wanted to start the conference today with the play
¡Ay María! to open up our emotions, to dislodge what many of us here have
been holding in. I sometimes worry that everyone moved so quickly to deal
with what was happening that they didn’t take time to process the near-death
collective experience that they had suffered and the trauma generated from
the large-scale structural abandonment. The ability of residents to move
through these experiences without taking a moment to mourn what happened
—mourn their dead, mourn their losses, and mourn the harm that they’ve
experienced—is not necessarily a healthy form of resilience.
    The traumatized resilience that Irma and María compounded and
illuminated brings us back to the question of sovereignty in Puerto Rico. In
this moment many are reimagining what sovereignty could be and what it
might mean. But I believe the question we need to ask is: What is the
relationship between self-reliance and self-determination? On the one hand,
you have communities taking responsibility for their own future: thinking
about how to feed themselves, how to guarantee access to drinking water,
how to construct sustainable forms of energy, and so on … Yet, on the other
hand, you have the state pushing forward austerity measures, gutting public
services, shrinking the education system, while they also welcome what they
call “new stakeholders” to the island.
    This includes some of the folks that you talk about in your book: the
cryptos, or the Bitcoiners, or the “Puertopians,” as they were imagining
themselves at one point. I think the extent to which they are going to become
major players is still an open question. The governor has said that blockchain
is going to lead the recovery, but I’m not sure he even knows what that
means. What I do know is that these wealthy new arrivals are increasingly
gaining power, becoming a political constituency—lobbying officials, writing
op-eds in the newspaper, gaining political traction. Since María, the governor
has been touring the United States—from New York to Silicon Valley—
advertising post-María Puerto Rico as good for business. He presents Puerto
Rico’s colonial status—its lower wages, tax loopholes, and regulation
exceptions, and now even the resilience of the population—as business
opportunities. He calls Puerto Rico the ideal place for “the human cloud”:
untethered workers who can set up with a laptop anywhere. Again, I’m not
sure if he knows what this means, but I’m interested in how these
cryptocurrency entrepreneurs themselves are thinking about sovereignty, and
why it is convenient for them to be in a non-sovereign state. A lot of them are
libertarian ideologues who don’t believe in a strong state to begin with, and
so they see Puerto Rico’s non-sovereign status as something they can really
take advantage of. Of course, others in Puerto Rico could really use public
services, labor legislation, environmental protections, and other signs of a
stronger state. So, it remains to be seen how these dueling interests will
become reconciled.
    Your book takes up many of these questions. Can you speak a little more
about how you see this unfolding?

NAOMI KLEIN. There’s a clear overlap between the Bitcoin entrepreneurs
who have descended on Puerto Rico and this obscure movement that some of
you may have heard about called seasteading. Some of the players are the
same. Seasteading is a movement that started about a decade ago. It was
funded by Peter Thiel, a billionaire, a James Bond villain figure who shuts
down media outlets who write things he doesn’t like. He’s an extreme
libertarian, devotee of Ayn Rand. He funded an organization whose president
is Milton Friedman’s grandson. And they have this dream of building floating
city-states that are completely sovereign, where they get a literal blank slate
because they build these floating islands. They’ve been talking about it and
theorizing for a decade now, and they’ve confronted some technical problems
around setting up in international waters. They imagine them to be green,
they imagine them to be totally self-sufficient. There are all kinds of
prototypes on it. Another interesting thing about Peter Thiel as it relates to
climate change is that he’s bought a huge amount of land in New Zealand,
where he’s building his postapocalyptic bunker, which was featured in the
New Yorker in an article called “Doomsday Prep for the Ultra-rich.” This is
important for us to think about in the context of climate change: why it seems
feasible to deny the reality of climate change in public while privately
building your own bunker. We’re seeing a lot more of that.
    There is this overlap, and there are some people who have been involved
in the seasteader movement who are also active in the cryptocurrency
economy. Their dream is to be free from government, free from taxes, to have
total sovereignty—to have their own society. This is their liberation
movement. They see any form of taxation and regulation as an attack on their
freedom. There are all these logistical problems in building their sovereign
floating city-states, and then along comes Puerto Rico and these laws that
offer pretty much corporate Club Med: 4 percent corporate tax, no tax on
dividends, no tax on interest, no capital gains tax. It’s very appealing,
particularly for the Bitcoin crowd, because they want to cash out and convert
their cryptocurrency into real currency, and they don’t want to get taxed on it.
There are huge amounts of money at stake here. I think we need to
understand this in the context of the depopulation of the island, where part of
the draw is that Puerto Rico doesn’t get totally depopulated, but a lot of
Puerto Ricans leave Puerto Rico; they get to build their city-states, which is
one of the things they’re openly talking about.
    So, you have that vision of sovereignty that I’ve just described: a very
thin idea of sovereignty, where sovereignty means hyperindividualism; it
means “I’m accountable to no one.” This is in contrast to the vision of deep
sovereignty that we’re hearing more about, which is not only political
sovereignty but also energy sovereignty, food sovereignty, and water
sovereignty. This second kind of sovereignty is all about interdependence
within and between communities and with the natural world. This is why I
call the book The Battle for Paradise—because we have these two dueling
visions of utopia that could not be more different. One precludes the other.
They can’t happily coexist because the land is scarce and the need for a tax
base is so important.
    But there is a shift happening. I noticed this when I was talking to
younger organizers in Puerto Rico—people who have grown up since the
global economic crisis in 2008 and who had watched the way that supposedly
sovereign states like Greece had their sovereignty stripped from them. Yanis
Varoufakis, the former finance minister of Greece, says that “governments
used to be overthrown with tanks; now it’s with banks.” I think there’s more
of an awareness for the generation that has come of age post-2008, and
witnesses this stripping of sovereignty, and also with the memory of Katrina,
and how places like Detroit and Flint have had emergency managers imposed
on them, that sovereignty is not only about achieving political independence.
They are not abandoning the project for political sovereignty but are really
trying to understand what it means in the age of global capitalism, when you
can have international financial institutions and national governments strip
the sovereignty of states using all kinds of financial levers. Strip the
sovereignty of cities, strip the sovereignty of whole nation-states, or you just
have sovereignty on paper, but you just have no economic control. That is
what has happened to Greece.
    This is not to say political sovereignty doesn’t matter, but I think there is
a growing interest in the idea of “multiple sovereignties,” a phrase I first
heard from Barcelona’s mayor, Ada Colau, in the context of the fight for
Catalan independence. She supports the Catalan people’s right to determine
their relationship with Spain. But unlike more traditional sovereigntists, she
has continued to insist that sovereign borders are not enough—we need
housing sovereignty, we need energy sovereignty, we need water
sovereignty, we need deep sovereignty. And we have to protect the space to
talk about those multiple sovereignties because there is a way that fights that
revolve around natural borders can tend to erase all these other sites of
struggle and just say, “We’ll deal with all of that afterwards. First, we have to
get political sovereignty.” And then often it comes at the expense of all that.
    Before we move on, I think you need to share a little bit about your
research with the crypto entrepreneurs, because you’ve been interviewing
them. What have you found in talking to them about what their vision is for
the island? What do they want?

YARIMAR BONILLA. Part of the problem is that they don’t have a vision
for the island; they have a vision for themselves on the island. What they
want is a place in which to enact individual, not collective, sovereignty.
    I have asked some of them why have they chosen to come to Puerto Rico,
and they’re very straightforward: for the tax incentives, and the nice weather
helps. I’ve also interviewed some who have come after María, and I’ve asked
them, “Why do you want to do business here? There’s unreliable electricity,
unreliable internet.” And they have said, “Well, in Condado, the internet is
better than in Silicon Valley, and the electricity never goes out.” So, they
have this kind of bunker mentality and a confidence that they have the
personal resources to fill in for any lack in collective services. It is
concerning that at a time when the government is reducing public services
and enforcing austerity measures that disproportionately impact the poor,
these new constituents could help tip the scales toward a recovery that centers
on individual responsibility at the same time that local populations are left
without collective safety nets.
    They’ve also said to me, “After María, this was the worst thing that
Puerto Ricans could possibly experience, and so if this is what the worst
looks like, then we’re OK.” It’s important to know that after María, hedge
fund managers and investors were really paying attention to what was going
to happen in Puerto Rico, and the value of Puerto Rican bonds actually went
up because people were able to deal with the storm so well.

NAOMI KLEIN. Since I wrote Battle for Paradise, the repression of social
movements and protest is becoming more and more severe. And there was a
moment when the governor was just shaking with anger about the fact that
projectiles were thrown during a May Day protest led by schoolteachers this
year. The governor was so angry that somebody had thrown a rock. He said,
“This is the message: we’re trying to get investors to come here.” So, what
you’re saying is so literal, he [the governor] is saying we need a subdued
population that does not resist, because resistance is a direct threat to this
vision.
YARIMAR BONILLA. Absolutely. The 2017 May 1 demonstration before
María was one of the largest public demonstrations in recent history, while
these most recent May 1 events became one of the largest instances of state
repression. The police teargassed not just protesters but also bystanders and
journalists. Not only this, but police went into surrounding communities and
teargassed surrounding streets as well.
    I think a lot of people in the United States who don’t understand the
history of economic exploitation and political repression in Puerto Rico
would be surprised that the only things protesters are throwing at the
governor right now are water bottles and pebbles. A lot of US onlookers
expected rioting and looting after the storm. But there wasn’t much, really.
There were very few protests and very little violence. Instead, communities
focused on taking care of themselves.
    This is what’s really complicated: how resilience can serve as a pressure
valve for the state. And I think this is one of the big questions we need to
tackle: How do we turn our self-reliance into something that can be self-
determining rather than something that simply lets the state off the hook?
Resilience suggests that business can carry on as usual, that Puerto Rico can
be “open for business” even as thousands remain roofless, homeless,
displaced, and destitute. In this way, resilience becomes jargon for simply
adapting to, rather than confronting or transforming, unacceptable conditions.

NAOMI KLEIN. It reminds me of when I was in New Orleans after the BP
disaster when the huge oil spill happened. I was talking to a civil rights
lawyer named Tracie Washington. She was remembering that after Katrina,
there was so much talk of the resilience of the people of New Orleans, and it
wasn’t interrogated too closely at that point. But then people started using the
same discourse after the spill, which had a huge economic impact on the
fisheries. And Tracie said, “I never want to hear the word resilience ever
again. Resilience means you can hit me again.” And I agree. But when I think
about the work that Arturo Massol is doing with solar microgrids, it’s
important to state that we do know that decentralized renewable energy is
more resilient and that there are more shocks to come. That’s what climate
change means.
YARIMAR BONILLA. I think we want our infrastructure to be resilient. We
want our buildings, our electricity systems to withstand shocks, but we don’t
want our population to be required to withstand repetitive shocks and
traumas.
    And this should be explicitly connected to similar conversations going in
mainland United States. For instance, African Americans in the United States
are expected to withstand shocks to the point that they are believed to have
higher thresholds of pain. So, when they go to the hospital, they don’t receive
the same kind of pain medication. This is directly connected to the notion that
Puerto Ricans don’t need the same wages, they don’t need the same public
services, they don’t need the same access to basic services. How to manage
the effects of these expectations while also pushing against them is one of the
big questions.
    What I think Massol and other activists in Puerto Rico are looking for is
not resilience but sustainability—the ability to continue to exist in the long
term, and to not just survive but to thrive. We cannot thrive under our current
energy model or our current political model.

NAOMI KLEIN. One of the things that every “shocked” society—or
anybody who has experienced a massive traumatic event—has in common is
the feeling of a total lack of control over their lives and an inability to protect
their loved ones. That is the most horrifying feeling that any individual can
feel. Especially for the parents in the room, that feeling of “I can’t project my
kids”—it’s the most wrenching feeling. And we need to remember that when
thinking about the infrastructure of disaster capitalism, where Puerto Ricans
are excluded from their own recovery and are put into this passive position of
watching outsiders come in. Whether it’s NGOs or whoever it is, it’s actually
retraumatizing, because once again the impacted people are out of control,
and they are being acted upon, this time in the so-called recovery. They have
no control.
    And it’s actually the opposite of recovery. Because the way to recover
from that trauma of losing all control over one’s life is to have some control
once again. To be empowered to exercise control. That is healing. Everyone
who works in trauma recovery knows this: that the way to help is to give
people agency again so that they are participants, not spectators in their own
lives. It doesn’t erase the trauma, but there is a healing that happens.
    And I saw some amazing examples of this in Puerto Rico. For example,
one of the most moving experiences I had was at this farm school in
Orocovis, where I met Dalma Cartagena, who has run the farm school there
for eighteen years. The students learn agroecology as part of their education.
What struck me most about visiting the school was that Dalma, unlike so
much of the humanitarian industrial complex, immediately gave the students
agency after María. She said, “You can help feed your families; you can be
part of the healing process. Just by planting these crops and growing this
food.” The students were harvesting crops when we visited and were so
energized by that work. They were so happy. The other thing Dalma talked
about was how important it was for young people to learn to trust the natural
world again. Because the feeling of being in a superstorm like María is to feel
that the natural world has turned against you. Learning to trust the natural
world, as a source of strength and sustenance, reminds us that we are part of a
web of life, that the land can support life, and that we’re part of this unending
relationship. She told me, “I tell the students: touch the flowers, touch the
plants, rebuild that trust.” That kind of knowledge has to inform what
recovery means. It can be woven in. People are doing that, but it’s in these
small pockets. The people with resources aren’t learning from it at all, aren’t
interested in it at all. They are retraumatizing people by treating them as
helpless when they aren’t.

YARIMAR BONILLA. I think that’s such an important point because as a
new hurricane season approached in Puerto Rico a lot of people discussed
how they get scared when it rains, scared when a stiff wind blows. There is so
much basic trauma that hasn’t been attended to. I think this idea of agency is
so important, and so is the idea of a just recovery. Not a people-powered
recovery in the sense of people being left to their own defenses to recover,
but rather a recovery that offers justice for those who have experienced these
repetitive shocks.
    Part of the problem is the way that Puerto Rico has been discussed in the
media: it has become a Trump story. Puerto Rico would have gotten much
less coverage if Trump hadn’t been in office. But the media was not really
focused on how Puerto Ricans were imagining their recovery, and on how
Puerto Rico fits within a larger Caribbean story. They were only interested in
finding Trump’s Katrina. In addition, the insistence that we must pay
attention to Puerto Ricans because they’re United States citizens is troubling.
It’s not because they’re US citizens that we should pay attention, it’s because
they’re experiencing a humanitarian crisis. Creating this distinction between
citizens and noncitizens in the Caribbean, and between citizens and
noncitizens in the United States is really problematic at a moment when
noncitizens are under attack. Moreover, it shifts the discourse away from a
model of recovery that takes into account colonial histories and the search for
regional solutions.

NAOMI KLEIN. I think it would be amazing if Puerto Rico could host a
conference on how disaster capitalism is impacting the Caribbean right now,
because it’s all over the place. Barbuda is an extreme example. For those of
you who don’t know, and it’s received almost no coverage, Irma led to a total
evacuation of Barbuda. There was absolutely no one on Barbuda because of
the evacuation. Barbudans were evacuated to Antigua, and you have this very
unequal relationship between the government of Barbuda and Antigua, where
Barbuda is a tiny player in the government of Antigua. The Antiguan
government can make fateful decisions for the people of Barbuda, so it’s kind
of like a subimperial relationship. Barbuda before the hurricane had this
extraordinary land law that makes it illegal to buy and sell land, not just to
foreigners, but land is held communally in Barbuda, the legacy of a slave
uprising. In a way, it’s one of the very few examples of real land reform after
slavery. That was hard won; it was a result of an uprising, and long protected,
fiercely protected. Prime Minister Gaston Brown went right in and said this is
our chance, this is our opportunity, Barbuda is open for business.
Immediately, when the island was evacuated, he moved to change the land
law. The other thing I would add about the problem with making this all
about Trump and all about the Republicans is that stories like the ones in
Barbuda don’t get covered. Part of the reason they don’t get covered is that,
so far as I can tell, one of the single biggest beneficiaries of that changed land
law in Barbuda is Robert De Niro, hero of the #Resistance here in the United
States. He owns a large hotel in Barbuda and has been trying to get around
that land law for years. I cowrote a piece about this on The Intercept, but the
pickup on this was very limited because people were busy celebrating Robert
De Niro for saying “Fuck Trump.” I think that is just one vivid example of
the limits of this frame and the problems with making it all about
pathologizing Trump.
YARIMAR BONILLA. Yes. And this is the problem with pretending that
Puerto Rico’s problems begin and end with Trump, because they don’t. I
think it’s important to keep this in mind, especially as it relates to the
campaigns to get those who migrated after María registered to vote. First, it’s
important to note that these new arrivals are displaced populations. They are
refugees of climate change and of a political and economic crisis. They
shouldn’t bear the burden of voting out a government that they didn’t get to
vote into power in the first place. Second, we shouldn’t assume that they’re
going to feel part of a political process that they’ve been excluded from,
disenfranchised from, their entire lives. To suddenly place these burdens on
them turns them once again into colonial pawns. I don’t think it’s the
responsibility of María refugees to flip states, or to flip Trump anything other
than the bird.
1. Lauren Feeney, “The Battle for Paradise: Naomi Klein Reports from Puerto Rico,”
   Intercept, March 20, 2018, http://theintercept.com/2018/03/20/puerto-rico-hurricane-
   maria-recovery.
2. Michel Martin, “Hurricane María’s Devastation of Puerto Rico, 1 Year Later,” All
   Things          Considered,        NPR,           September         23,        2018,
   https://www.npr.org/2018/09/23/650956637/hurricane-marias-devastation-of-puerto-
   rico-1-year-later
3. “JunteGente,” accessed February 14, 2019, http://juntegente.org/en/
4. “Arecma,” accessed February 14, 2019, https://www.apoyomutuomaríana.com/eng.
                                iAY MARÍA!

    Mariana Carbonell, Marisa Gómez Cuevas, José Luis
    Gutiérrez, José Eugenio Hernández, Mickey Negrón,
         Maritza Pérez Otero, and Bryan Villarini




¡Ay Maria! actors in front of the residencial Plaza Apartments en Manatí November 13,
2017. Image provided by Mariana Carbonell


                        EDITORS’ INTRODUCTION

A month after Hurricane María ravaged Puerto Rico, a small group of actors
came together in San Juan to create a short play, ¡Ay María! (Oh María!),
about their experiences before, during, and after the crisis. In a time when
most of the archipelago still had no electricity or water, people still lived in
shelters, and telecommunications were spotty at best, this group embarked on
a mission to relieve some of the population’s anguish and trauma through
entertainment. During only a week of workshops, they collectively wrote the
script and set out to present ¡Ay María! in all seventy-eight towns of Puerto
Rico in a rented RV. Sometimes the performances took place where there
was a group of people who had lost everything they owned, as they waited
for a free meal, a ham-and-cheese sandwich and a bottle of water, the only
meal they would have that day. Sometimes the audience would join in the
action, blurring the lines between fact and fiction. For the five weeks that it
took the group to travel the archipelago, the actors looked directly into the
sadness in the eyes of their audience and transformed that pain into a smile,
into hope.


   PRODUCER’S INTRODUCTION BY MARIANA CARBONELL

October 20, 2017, was supposed to be the opening night of the first play I
produced in Puerto Rico. Instead, I found myself among friends from the San
Juan theater community, commiserating over the damage the theaters had
suffered after Hurricane María. It was exactly one month after the storm, and
we were worried about when we’d be able to get back to work. I remember
thinking of Peter Brook’s words: “I can take any empty space and call it a
bare stage.” One thought led to another. If an empty space in San Juan is a
stage, what about Mayagüez? What about Fajardo? “Whatever happened to
traveling theaters?” I asked. This was the beginning of the idea that would
become ¡Ay María!
    I reached out to acclaimed theater director and friend Maritza Pérez
Otero, who practices collective creation in a style based on the Theater of the
Oppressed. I told her I wanted to create a show about the hurricane and
present it all over Puerto Rico, using theater to relieve some of the
population’s anguish and trauma through entertainment. I wanted this to
happen as soon as possible. She enthusiastically agreed.
    Recruiting the actors was harder. I must have reached out to more than
twenty actors. Some could not join because they were working with FEMA,
some never got my messages because we still didn’t have reliable cellular
service, some had to take care of elderly family members. In the end, five
actors showed up for our first meeting, and what was supposed to be a
brainstorming session became something more like group therapy. One actor
had lost every physical possession he had, another lost her car to the floods.
We all had a story to tell, for the hurricane had spared no one.
    After only a week of workshops, together we developed the text of the
show under Maritza’s direction. The work centered around our experiences
before, during, and after the crisis. The tragicomic vignettes and songs
depicted the struggles shared by everyone. The lack of supplies, including
water, gasoline, and batteries, the floods, the humiliation of Trump’s visit, the
failures of the local and federal agencies, and the constant battle with
mosquitoes.




¡Ay María! actors at the CREARTE parking long in Yabucoa on November 26, 2017.
Image provided by Mariana Carbonell


One of the most important aspects of the production was that it needed to be
self-sufficient. I didn’t want us to go to a town, perform, and then ask for a
place to sleep, or a working bathroom, or an electrical outlet, or food and
water. This is why the recreational vehicle, which we named Rocinante, was
essential to the production. I rented the RV for a month. We performed the
thirty-minute play two to four times a day in order to reach our goal of
seventy-eight towns. None of the theaters in Puerto Rico were operating at
this time, and some towns don’t have theaters, so the venues for the
performances varied widely. We would try to establish communication with
the towns’ mayors, school principals, or community leaders to coordinate a
time and place for the performances, but oftentimes, especially in the island’s
central mountain range, communication was impossible, so we improvised.
For five weeks we performed in schools, shelters, town squares, nursing
homes, basketball courts, bakeries, and bars.




¡Ay María! actors at Parque Ciudad Masso in San Lorenzo on December 6, 2017. Image
provided by Mariana Carbonell


As I look back on the experience nearly a year and a half after the hurricane, I
get very emotional. I get sad because I remember the stories I heard, the
destruction I saw. I get angry because I saw the conditions people were living
in two months after the storm. The hurricane was a disaster; the government’s
response was a tragedy. I get frustrated because some of the themes explored
in the play are as relevant today as they were in the days immediately after
the storm. How we will ultimately recover from this is yet to be seen.
                            OH MARÍA!
Translated by Carina del Valle Schorske
¡Ay María! actors at the Ricardo Rodríguez Torres public school in Florida on November
13, 2017. Image provided by Mariana Carbonell


MICKEY. Hello. My name is Mickey, but now I’m a palo de guayaba [guava
tree].
JOSÉ EUGENIO. Hello. My name is José Eugenio, and I am a palo de roble
[oak tree].

BRYAN. Hello. My name is Bryan, and I am a palo de ceiba [ceiba tree].


MARISA. Hello. My name is Marisa, and I am a palito de ron [shot of rum].1

JOSÉ LUIS. Hello. My name is José Luis, and I am a hummingbird. (Flies
between branches.)

JOSÉ LUIS. Crisis! A great disaster draws near.

MICKEY. I know what it is! It’s the Fiscal Control Board.

MARISA. I know, it’s the governor.


JOSÉ EUGENIO. I know, it’s the ashes of Peñuelas. (Everyone sneezes.)2

BRYAN. No, it’s another strike at the university.

EVERYONE, chanting: Candela, candela, la iupi da candela.

JOSÉ LUIS. No! It’s a category 4 hurricane.

EVERYONE. Uy! (Singing.)

Marullo grande de mi amor
   Creciente encantadora
   Tsunami exquisito de pasión
   Tu amor me envuelve como ola, ay qué ola.

   [My love’s great swell
   Growing, enchanting
   Passion’s sweet tsunami
   Your love overcomes me like a wave, oh what a wave! (Repeated.)]


MARISA. Hello and good morning. My name is Ada Bombón.3 It’s 6:35 in
the morning, and the cone of uncertainty has become certain catastrophe.

MICKEY, on his cell phone. Mami, did you listen to Ada? She says the
storm’s coming in the form of a cone. I’m scared shitless. Put gas in both
cars.

MARISA (ADA BOMBÓN). We’re registering sustained winds of 275 miles
per hour. According to the National Hurricane Center, Hurricane María is
headed for Puerto Rico from the east/northeast.

BRYAN, on his cell phone in the aisle of an imaginary grocery store. There
aren’t even hot dogs? I’ll buy beer. God will provide the rest.

MARISA (ADA BOMBÓN). This storm is among the biggest and strongest
seen this hurricane season. I urge everyone to prepare themselves, to take all
necessary measures.

JOSÉ EUGENIO, on his cell phone. There’s no water in the supermarket. Or
the pharmacy. What? The ATMs aren’t working?!

MARISA (ADA BOMBÓN). Buy canned food, secure your storm windows,
do everything you can before the gusts of strong rain arrive.

JOSÉ LUIS, on his cell phone. I’m in the battery aisle. There aren’t any AAs,
AAAs, or AEE left.4

MARISA (ADA BOMBÓN). Finish all your preparations. Leave the flood
zones. Get out of vulnerable buildings. I’m urging you, please: stay calm!
(Everyone screams and runs. Bryan spins like the hurricane with a mosquito
net over his head. While he lists the names of Puerto Rico’s municipalities,
all the characters start falling, one on top of the other.)

BRYAN. Naguabo, Aibonito, Utuado, Utuado otra vez, Arecibo. (He takes
off the mosquito netting.) I’m dizzy, I’m going to Tampa. (The pileup of
people takes notice.) José Luis! Come up here, it’s flooding down there!
(José Luis stands up.)

BRYAN. Marisa! And your mother? (Marisa stands up.)

MARISA. I think she’s in the shelter. Mickey! (Everyone helps Mickey stand
up.) How many times did I tell you to go to the shelter?!

MICKEY. Girl, don’t give me a hard time.

JOSÉ LUIS. Are you OK?

MICKEY. I lost everything. (Pause. Singing.)
  Fue un 20 de septiembre
  Cuando nos cogió María
  No me había llegado el agua
  Desde la dichosa Irma.
  Yo me fui pa casa’e mami
  Yo me fui pa casa’e papi
  Yo me quedé en mi casa
  con mi gata bien paría …

   [It was the 20th of September
   When María came for us
   We said we were blessed
   When Irma’s waters spared us.
   I went to my mami’s house
   I went to my papi’s
   I stayed in my house
   where my cat was giving birth]

(Individually, members of the cast ask members of the audience where they
spent the night of the hurricane.)

MICKEY. We owe this to …

EVERYONE, singing.
  María bonita, María del alma
  Que provocaste muchos derrumbes
  E inundaciones y estos mosquitos

   [Beautiful María, María of my soul
   Thanks to you we have landslides
   And floods and mosquitoes]

(The cast huddles under the mosquito netting.)

JOSÉ EUGENIO. You wouldn’t happen to have any more of the OFF that
you lent me?

JOSÉ LUIS. What’s this about OFF? What I have is a natural recipe for
repellant from my grandmother and great-grandmother and great-great
grandmother!

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Fine then, give me that recipe!

JOSÉ LUIS. Take out a paper and pencil and write it down. Start with a cup
of extra virgin olive oil.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Can it be vegetable oil?
JOSÉ LUIS. It could even be gasoline, if that’s what you want.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Virgin vegetable oil.


JOSÉ LUIS. Add a cup of wonder water.5

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Is that like the sweat of Wonder Woman?

JOSÉ LUIS. It smells better.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Wonder water.

JOSÉ LUIS. Then you’re going to add a few drops of eucalyptus oil.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Could it be malagueta, sweet pepper?

JOSÉ LUIS. It could be malagueta, but grind it up good.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Ground sweet pepper.

JOSÉ LUIS. Then add a few slices of cinnamon bark.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Like the sticks?

JOSÉ LUIS. Like the sticks. Whole.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. How many?

JOSÉ LUIS. However many you want.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Four sticks.
JOSÉ LUIS. Finish it up by adding cloves, what we use for making majarete
and tembleque. Shake it up well. Then grease up your whole body with it,
and there you go. An old remedy against mosquitoes.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Neighbor, forgive me for questioning you, but this must
smell awful …


JOSÉ LUIS. Not at all. This smells better than any colonia.6

MARISA. Well, sure, boys, anything’s better than this colony.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Where did you find all those things?

JOSÉ LUIS. You have to wait in line at the store.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Uyyy, that line is really long.

(The cast emerges from the mosquito net and gets in line. While they talk they
slump lower and lower until they collapse on the floor.)

MARISA. This line isn’t as bad as the one for water.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. True, it’s not as bad as the line for the ATM.

JOSÉ LUIS. Yeah, it’s actually not as bad as the line for buying a little bag of
ice.

MICKEY. At least this line’s moving a little faster than the one for gasoline.

BRYAN. This one’s not as bad as the one for Western Union.

MARISA. I was waiting longer to get into the supermarket.
JOSÉ EUGENIO. This one’s worse than the line for the emergency room.

JOSÉ LUIS. I was in line for a week to get a power inverter.

MICKEY. I even had to wait in the line for diesel.

BRYAN. Excuse me, do they distribute tarps here? (Singing.)
  Fue un 20 de septiembre       [It was the 20th of September
    Cuando nos cogió María         When María came for us
    Trump llegó a Puerto Rico      Trump arrived in Puerto Rico
    Después de 13 días.            After thirteen days.
    Y el gobernador le dijo        And the governor said,
    “aquí no ha pasado nada”       “Nothing’s happened here”
    Y el tirano anaranjado         And the orange tyrant
    Nos tiró papel toalla.         Threw paper towels at us.]

MICKEY (TRUMP). Hello, brown people of Puerto Rico. I’m the president
of the world. Your governor told me there have been only sixteen deaths.
That’s not a disaster. The real disaster is the way you’re messing with my
budget!

MARÍA (SAN JUAN MAYOR YULÍN). Our people are dying!

MICKEY (TRUMP). Shut up, nasty woman. Here, I’ve brought you extra
soft toilet paper to wipe your little butts.

JOSÉ LUIS (ROSSELLÓ). The plan for the planned planification is based on
an extensive planity plan that I planned all by myself planning in the …

(While Rosselló talks, Bryan translates his speech into sign language at his
side. Mickey, Marisa, and José Eugenio play football with a roll of paper
towels till they hit Bryan in the face with it and he falls down “dead.”)
MICKEY. And Mr. Governor, what about this fatality?

JOSÉ LUIS (ROSSELLÓ). Well, did they do an autopsy?

MICKEY. He just died!

JOSÉ LUIS (ROSSELLÓ). Well, it doesn’t count.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Mr. Governor, my best friend committed suicide a week
after the hurricane because he’d lost everything. Does that death count?

JOSÉ LUIS (ROSSELLÓ). Well, did they do an autopsy?

JOSÉ EUGENIO. The morgues were all full!

JOSÉ LUIS (ROSSELLÓ). I see, well, then it doesn’t count.

MARISA. Mr. Governor, what about the hundreds of people who couldn’t
receive medical care without electricity, which was caused by the hurricane.
Do they count?

JOSÉ LUIS (ROSSELLÓ). Did they get autopsies?

MARISA. The administration ordered the cremation of hundreds of cadavers
without autopsies!

JOSÉ LUIS (ROSSELLÓ). Who approved this?


MARISA. Héctor Pesquera.7

JOSÉ LUIS (ROSSELLÓ). Ah well, they don’t count.
MICKEY. Mr. Governor, and the baby from Barranquitas who was carried
away by the wind right in front of her parents?

JOSÉ LUIS (ROSSELLÓ). Well, was there an autopsy?

EVERYONE. The wind ripped the baby away!

JOSÉ LUIS (ROSSELLÓ). Well, it doesn’t count. The press conference is
over. (He answers his cell phone.) Daddy, did I do a good job?8

BRYAN (REVIVED). Is there cell service?

(Everyone looks for service on their phones.)

BRYAN. Titi Luli? Titi Luli? You sent me a generator from New York? Oh
no—by mail? They’ve already stolen it.

(Everyone gets in a line. Mickey and José Luis are carrying a baby in their
arms.)

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Welcome to the office of the public advocate. Please form
a line. How can I help you?

JOSÉ LUIS. We’re still waiting on an electronic deposit to our Family Link
card.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. I’m sorry, love, if there isn’t electricity, how are you going
to receive an electronic deposit? I can’t do anything for you.

MICKEY. You can’t do anything for us?

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Do you know the convention center in San Juan? That’s
where the COE is. They can help you there.9
MICKEY. But the COE told us they can’t help us!

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Next! How can I help you?

MARISA, talking fast. Look, the bank took my house and the hurricane
swept away the house that I’m renting so I left for a shelter but we’re too
many families in this school building and the wastewater started rising so we
left for another shelter but this one isn’t in my town and I don’t have a car so
I don’t have any way to take my kids to school, I need a house, I can’t go on
sharing a bathroom with forty-five people and when you see the empty
houses that the bank has taken from people, all these foreclosed houses with
roofs, totally empty … listen, I’m desperate, I don’t know what to do …

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Breathe! Look, next to the convention center is the
Sheraton hotel. That’s where the governor is with all his friends enjoying the
air-conditioning … go complain there. Next. (Bryan steps up, and José
Eugenio pinches his nose.) What a stench!

BRYAN. So, this is why I’m here. In my community there’s no water, and
we want to know when the trucks of water will arrive, those ones they’re
calling “oasis” …

JOSÉ EUGENIO. I recommend going to Roosevelt Roads in Ceiba because
there are a bunch of water bottles over there covered in tarps.10 You
shouldn’t drink them, but at least you can bathe yourself with them, because
with that stink I can’t do anything for you. (Mickey draws close to José
Eugenio and almost vomits on him.) Uy, leptospirosis, get away from me, go
to a hospital. Next.

JOSÉ LUIS. I applied for $500 from FEMA, and it still hasn’t arrived.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Do you see the sign over there? That’s the number for
FEMA. Everyone use that for your calls, because I’m on a shortened
schedule. Goodbye.
MARISA, at a FEMA call center. You have reached the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. To continue in English, say “English.”

(Everyone at once.)

BRYAN. English.

MICKEY. Español.

JOSÉ LUIS. Espanish.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Spanish.

MARISA. To begin, press the five-digit zip code where the damage occurred.

(Everyone says a different zip code.)

MARISA. I’ll transfer you to an operator. “Hello, FEMA.”

MICKEY. Hello. Am I talking to a human being?

MARISA. Mmhmm.

MICKEY. Thank God, because I don’t understand the machine. Look, I’m
calling because I applied for the $500 they’re giving people …

MARISA. Yes, the $500. Lots of people have called for the $500.
Unfortunately, if it has not arrived in your account, you have to call this same
number to appeal it.

MICKEY. But I’ve been on hold for three hours. Appeal it for me.

MARISA. I’m sorry, I don’t have the authorization to appeal it …
MICKEY. Please!

MARISA. You’re going to have to call again. I’m sorry.

MICKEY. Don’t hang up!

MARISA. Have a good day. (Hangs up. Answers.) Hello, FEMA.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Hello. Look, I have a problem, it’s raining and I’m getting
wet.

MARISA. Well, go inside your house!

JOSÉ EUGENIO. I am inside my house! But my roof is like a colander. I
need a tarp.

MARISA. Yes, there are lots of people asking for tarps, but we don’t have
any left. The problem is that María came too late. We already had Hurricane
Harvey in Texas and Hurricane Irma in Florida, and unfortunately, we just
don’t have enough tarps for all these emergencies. You’ll have to go to Home
Depot.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. But we pay for FEMA, and I don’t have extra money to
buy a tarp.

MARISA. I’m sorry. You can try calling back tomorrow. (Hangs up.
Answers.) Hello, FEMA.

JOSÉ LUIS. Hey, baby. Is military food microwavable?

MARISA. How many times have I told you not to call me at work? Don’t
come at me with some bullshit about military food. You’re a grown man, you
can make rice. Finally someone in this home has a job, someone got a little
gig with FEMA. I need you to take care of the kids. Don’t call me at work.
(Hangs up. Answers.) Hello, FEMA.

BRYAN. Hello! FEMA? Yes. English! Because in English the money comes
faster!

MARISA. Hello? (Hangs up.)

BRYAN. Hello? Hello? (Looks at his phone.) My battery ran out!

(Bryan and José Eugenio become a military helicopter. Marisa, Mickey, and
José Luis yell at the soldier like little children excited to see a helicopter.
Bryan throws out packets of food in slow motion.)

BRYAN. Military food…. Very high in sodium … It gives you crazy
constipa …

(The helicopter takes off, leaving children coughing in the dust.)

MICKEY. I don’t want to be a soldier anymore!

(Everyone becomes generators on the floor, making generator noises.)


BRYAN. There’s a reason “Puerto Rico rises”.11 Who can sleep with this
noise?!

MICKEY. And this smell.

MARISA. And this heat.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Good morning, neighbors!

JOSÉ LUIS. Ave María, you’re fresh today!
MICKEY. José, you’re going to have to do something about this generator. It
doesn’t let me sleep. I just can’t.

JOSÉ LUIS. You should set it on a timer so that it turns on at a certain hour.

MARISA. And I need you to do something with that muffler. My kids have
asthma, and you know how the hospitals are in this country. I can’t take that
risk.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. You complain now, but not when I pass you the extension
cord to charge your stuff.

MICKEY. Look, José Eugenio, the question is, Is the beer cold?

JOSÉ EUGENIO. Since last night!

(Everyone celebrates.)

JOSÉ LUIS. Well, then leave the generator on!

MARISA. In last night’s domino game we decided whoever lost would have
to cook tonight.

JOSÉ LUIS. Bryan!

BRYAN. Me? I can’t even boil water without burning it! The kitchen isn’t
for me.

JOSÉ LUIS. OK, well, I’ll do Bryan a favor and cook.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. If you want, I have some frozen steaks that we can share
among the neighbors.
MICKEY. Ay, I’m going to miss you.

JOSÉ EUGENIO. You’re leaving too?

MICKEY. It’s not that I want to leave, it’s that I have to. The house doesn’t
pay for itself; the light, the water, and the telephone have been cut off for two
months, and they’re still charging me. And the only call coming in is my boss
telling me that the business is closed and I have to look for another job.
Neighbor, I have savings, and I’ve tried to stretch that money, but it’s
running out. So, I have a cousin that left for the States and is living in some
tents for refugees in a parking garage, and he tells me that it’s fine and that I
should come with my daughter. Because that’s the other thing: my daughter
has a chronic condition and she used to get therapy in school. But my
daughter’s school hasn’t opened yet, first because it was a shelter and then
they closed it like so many schools that Keleher is shutting down.12 And my
daughter’s teachers are responsible, decent people, so they went to protest the
closing of the school, and can you believe they were arrested?! Try and tell
me this country isn’t fucked. Neighbors, this country is strangling me. This
country with its corrupt officials is messing with my family and yours. What
do you want me to do?

MARISA. I can lend you money.

MICKEY. And how will I repay you?

JOSÉ EUGENIO. You’re talking nonsense! What’s this about going to live
in a tent city in a parking garage? You have neighbors here who support you
and will lend a helping hand when you need it. The sun is going to come out
again.

MICKEY, singing to the tune of “Sale el Sol” by Ismael Rivera.
  ¿Saldrá el sol
  Dentro de esta tragedia?
  Vivo desesperado
   Pensando en el avión.

   Todos menos Mickey
   Estarás en otra tierra, no en la tuya
   En un trabajo que no te gusta
   Estarás en otra tierra sin tus hijos
   En un invierno pasando frío

   From this tragedy?
   I live in desperation
   Dreaming of airplanes.

   Everyone but Mickey.
   You’ll be in another country, not yours
   In a job you don’t like
   You’ll be in another country without your children
   Trudging through a cold winter]

MICKEY. But I have to leave.

MARISA. If you have to leave, then go, and join the diaspora that’s helped us
so much from abroad.

MICKEY, to the audience. Neighbor, what do you think? Should I stay or
should I go?

(Various answers from the audience.)

MICKEY. OK, I’ll give it two more months. But if I stay, I’m not going to
stay quiet, because I’m angry. The only good thing about those storm winds?
They ripped through and exposed the government’s scams for all to see.
MARISA. Now we can see how badly administered this country is, from the
Department of Consumer Affairs to the Department of Housing, Health, and
Education. While people were going hungry, the government was signing
multimillion-dollar contracts with American companies, and you get to
thinking, what has the government ever done for us?

MICKEY. I know what they did, they made a hashtag:
#PuertoRicoSeLevanta. But it’s been a long time since Puerto Ricans and
everyone who lives here, even if they aren’t from here … it’s been a long
time since we’ve been on our feet. Here, the one who has to stand up is the
government.

EVERYONE, singing.
  Marullo grande de mi amor
  Creciente encantadora
  Tsunami exquisito de pasión
  Tu amor me envuelve como ola, ay qué ola.

   Al otro día de María
   Al despertar los vecinos
   Con hacha, machete y pico
   Abrimos nuevos caminos, caminos.

   Y levantamos escombros
   Y compartimos comida
   Pero pa’ buscar el agua
   hicimos tremenda fila, ay qué fila.

   Así queda demostrado
   Quien levantó nuestra tierra
   La gente trabajadora
   Que somos una jodienda, jodienda.
Ay María
Hay caminos
Los vecinos
Construímos
Puerto Rico

[My love’s great swell
Growing, enchanting
Passion’s sweet tsunami
Your love overcomes me like a wave, oh what a wave!

The day after María
All the neighbors woke up
With axes, machetes, and picks
We opened up new roads, new ways.

And we cleared rubble
And we shared food
But to find water
We waited in line, what a line it was!

Now it’s clear
Who lifted up our country
The hardworking people
We’re the shit!

Oh María
There are ways
we neighbors
rebuild Puerto Rico.]
1. In Spanish, the word palo can refer to both a tree and a shot or drink of liquor. The
    original Spanish text draws a parallel between the guava, oak, and ceiba trees and
    Marisa’s little cup of rum, between the natural world and the world of human comforts.
2. Peñuelas is a town on the southern coast of the island where the private company
    Applied Energy Systems (AES) dumped toxic coal ash. Activists had been struggling
    against this pollution since before the hurricane. But now the problem is even more
    grave: the ash was not covered in preparation for the hurricane, and we don’t yet know
    the effects of this negligence.
3. This is a reference to meteorologist Ada Monzón, who became infamous during María
    for her frequent Facebook Live messages.
4. AEE refers to the local power authority: Autoridad de Energía Eléctrica.
5. Agua Maravilla (wonder water) is a popular brand of witch hazel.
6. In Spanish, the word colonia means both colony and cologne.
7. Héctor Pesquera is the Security Secretary and became a controversial figure after he
    denied the death count.
8. Ricardo Rosselló’s father, Pedro Rosselló, is a former governor of Puerto Rico.
9. The Centro de Operaciones de Emergencia (COE) was the controversial center of
    operations for the local government and FEMA after María.
10. Nearly a year after María, millions of spoiled water bottles were found to have been
    abandoned by FEMA on an open-air strip in this former military base.
11. “Puerto Rico se levanta” (Puerto Rico rises) was the post-María motto promoted by the
    government and private companies, taken up by many individual Puerto Ricans. “Se
    levanta” has many meanings—stands up, gets back on its feet, wakes up, rises—but all
    of them in this context emphasize self-sufficiency and bootstrap solutions rather than
    an ethic of state or even community care.
12. Julia Keleher is Puerto Rico’s Secretary of Education and a polarizing figure because
    of her role in closing down hundreds of public schools in the name of austerity.
     PART II
Narrating the Trauma
                             WAPA RADIO

            Voices amid the Silence and Desperation

                      Sandra D. Rodríguez Cotto

Imagine you are a thirty-year-old woman. You’re a single mom with a
daughter, and you have moved to Manatí, a town on the northern coast of
Puerto Rico, in an economically deprived area. You are in hiding there from
your estranged husband, who has repeatedly raped and beaten you. He once
hit you so hard that you were left legally blind. You can see colors only with
a special light that your daughter carries for you. You are afraid, shaking,
fearing he might come back to kill both you and your daughter. She is six
years old.
    Now imagine that, in addition to all this, a hurricane knocks out the
electricity for months. Roads are closed, debris blocks passage on the streets,
and power lines are strewn on the ground.
    This happened to a woman who, only God knows how, walked to four
different police stations after the hurricane hit. The first one was destroyed by
a river, and the other three had only one or two officers. She wanted to file a
report stating that she was a victim of domestic violence and needed
protection. She knew her attacker was following her, and she wanted to
inform the community where she was living. The officers in the last station
said they couldn’t help because they had no cars and the power was out.
    One night in San Juan, about three weeks after the hurricane, I was on the
air at WAPA Radio, the only radio network that was covering the entire
island, taking calls from listeners. We had six phone lines, but only one was
working, so all the callers had to wait to get on it. People called asking for
help or food, or to let their relatives know that they were alive. It was almost
midnight when the woman called the station. It was difficult to hear her over
the static. After all, the telecommunications system had collapsed, as well as
radio and TV antennas. There was no internet either.
     She said she needed help and was only asking someone to donate one of
those special lights that would allow her to see. Hers had broken during the
hurricane. She needed one to escape, she said, and her six-year-old daughter
would serve as her guide. Hearing her voice, I immediately knew something
was wrong, and I kept asking questions. Then she told me and all our
listeners about her ordeal.
     Just imagine her desperation—she was willing to talk on the radio,
regardless of whether somebody identified her, in order to save her and her
daughter’s lives.
     I told her to wait so I could take the phone call in private, but the call
dropped just as she started to talk. I went crazy. I feared the worst.
Frantically, I begged her to call back. I asked God to save her. This all
happened on the air.
     Luckily for the woman, a group of nuns in the town of Guánica, on the
southern coast of the island, who belong to the Fátima Sisters Order, were
listening. One of them knew the area because she has relatives nearby, and
she made her group of nuns jump into their van and drive through the
darkness, in the middle of the night, all the way north to find the woman.
They did. The saved her and her daughter’s lives and put them in a safe house
near their convent. Two days after the call, I found out about the nuns and
about a Pentecostal pastor and his wife who brought not one but two of the
special lights to the radio station to donate them to her. The nuns came to the
station and picked them up along with other donations.
     My colleagues and I at the radio station heard stories like this from the
day after the hurricane, September 21, all the way to December.



Nobody is prepared to experience what we did at the station. Better said,
nobody had any idea what the hurricane would lead to. Some of us remember
Hurricane Hugo in 1989 and Hurricane George in 1998. Almost an entire
generation had gone by without a hurricane. So initially, people would listen
to the newscasts and the meteorologist, and they heard the messages telling
them to be ready. But the truth is, most people thought nothing would
happen.
     Part of the public disbelief resulted from the local government’s poor
strategy and planning. The official government propaganda website, as I
called it, belonged to the Emergency Management Office (Centro de
Operaciones de Emergencia), but it was managed by the same public
relations firm that ran the election campaign of Governor Ricardo Rosselló
and that handles most official communications. Instead of sending out tweets
about how to prepare for the hurricane, or even announcing a list of shelters,
the firm tweeted modeling photos of First Lady Beatriz Rosselló in her
seventh month of pregnancy. The same image appeared on several official
Twitter and Facebook feeds, such as the police, 911, and the governor’s
office.
     A few days before the hurricane hit, Rosselló did go on a media tour
telling people to move to a safe location. But some people didn’t take the
warning seriously. This changed thanks to what I call “the Pesquera effect.”
The head of the Security and Public Safety Commission, Héctor Pesquera,
went to the press and told the public, “You have to move or you are going to
die.” That’s when people got scared. Pesquera was in charge of supervising
emergency management, but his experience as a cop led him to threaten the
population as a tactic to compel everyone to take the hurricane seriously. In
retrospect, you can tell he had no idea how to handle an emergency, but his
tactics scared enough people and made them move to safe locations. But it
was too late.
     Well before the hurricane, it was evident that there were problems in the
preparation efforts.
     A week before Hurricane Irma destroyed the Lesser Antilles and affected
the east coast of Puerto Rico, I published an op-ed titled “The Dependency on
Antennas” on the local news site NotiCel. I asked what would happen if a
hurricane knocked out telecommunications. After it was published, I got a
call from Sandra Torres, president of the Puerto Rico Telecommunications
Regulatory Board. “That’s not going to happen,” she said. The telecom
companies, she said, had spent millions in developing a solid infrastructure. I
knew she was wrong. Companies were investing not in their infrastructure
but rather in their strategies to increase their share of the market. I knew the
technology in Puerto Rico was not up-to-date.
     Then Hurricane Irma hit, and half the island was left without power and
without telephone service. So, I wrote a second column in NotiCel titled
“Telecommunications Collapse.” And then María hit. It was complete chaos.
People had expected interruptions in power and water service, but not
telecommunications.
     That really hit a collective nerve.
     People were desperate. Entire families would park their cars on the
highway to try to find a signal so that they could call their relatives and tell
them they were alive. The younger generations had never experienced
anything like this and were in a state of shock being without social media or
the internet. It was like going back in time.
     Without television, newspapers, or the internet, the only thing available
was the radio. During the hurricane, I was listening to the number-one
network, Univision Radio, on a tiny, battery-operated radio when renowned
personality Rubén Sánchez said on air that the station’s windows had
shattered due to a fallen tree and they had to go. Then the station went off. It
had lost its main antenna. Then Noti-Uno network went off, and so did Radio
Isla. Those were some of the largest AM networks. The same happened to the
FM stations. It was scary and unbelievable. After all, Puerto Rico has more
radio stations per square mile—a total of 125 stations, including the second-
oldest in Latin America—than any other US territory.
     No one could believe everything was so silent. It was eerie as if death
were near. I moved my tiny radio dial to WAPA Radio 680 AM, a mom-and-
pop operation owned by a Cuban exile family whose motto is that Puerto
Rico must become the fifty-first state; every day at noon they play “The Star-
Spangled Banner.” It is a small, very modest station, but the owners had
spent thousands on improving their microwave and analog signal, and it was
the only station that survived María. The voices of their three hosts, Jesús
Rodríguez-García, Luis Penchi, and Ismael Torres, were the only ones on the
air throughout the entire island while the winds were destroying entire towns.
     WAPA Radio was the only network that remained on the air. There were
over eight small stations operating in some areas, but their signals were
limited to specific towns away from the hurricane’s path. WAPA was the
only network that could reach the entire island.
     After thirty hours of uninterrupted broadcasting, the hosts’ voices started
to falter. Back home, I knew I had to do something. I needed to help. So, the
day after the hurricane passed and winds were out, I checked that my house
was OK, jumped into my car, and drove to the station. One of the owners,
eighty-year-old doña Carmen Blanco, was surprised to see me and asked
what I was doing there. “I just came here to help,” I said. “Please go in and
help,” she replied.
    I thought they would ask me to write the headlines, but they decided to
put me on the air so they could take a break. I wasn’t prepared, so I asked
reporters to come to WAPA. And they did. Over sixty reporters from
newspapers, television stations, online news sites, and even competing
stations showed up at WAPA Radio to help. Many doctors, psychiatrists, and
volunteers did the same and filled the station.
    Hundreds of people formed long lines around the station every day,
waiting to get in and write down their names so that the reporters would
mention them on the air and let their relatives know they were alive. Some
came asking for help, food, and water. Others had lost everything. Many
churches, community groups, and nonprofits brought in donations. And then
mayors, military personnel, and even Rosselló, came to the station because
the government’s emergency headquarters was flooded. For a few days after
Hurricane María, WAPA Radio became the government’s operations
headquarters.
    In that chaos, we aired twenty-four hours a day. To make this possible,
the network’s two other owners, Jorge and Wilfredo Blanco (Carmen’s son
and husband) had to maintain WAPA’s network of six stations and their
repeating antennas and microwave signals around the island. The stations are
WMIA in Arecibo, WISO in Ponce, WTIL in Mayagüez, WVOZ in
Aguadilla, WXRF in Guayama, and WAPA in San Juan. So, they spent their
days driving throughout the island along broken roads, from one antenna or
station to the next, refilling gas generators and checking signals. They did
that for four straight months.
    We stayed at WAPA and continued our work as volunteer reporters. At
night, we slept on the floor. We did this partly because people kept coming to
the station hour after hour asking for help, partly because we were receiving
so much terrible news of devastation, but especially because we are all
journalists. We didn’t leave the station because we had a strong ethical
commitment to help people and report the news.
    From day one, we asked hard questions that government officials couldn’t
or wouldn’t answer. Why wasn’t the head of FEMA providing information
about the death toll, or ongoing environmental crises such as flooding? Why
wasn’t the secretary of health providing guidance to the public in order to
prevent epidemics? Why was the secretary of Family Affairs (Departamento
de la Familia) silent about the managers who abandoned nursing homes,
leaving the elderly people there to die? Who could tell us how many people
were left homeless? How was aid being distributed, and why did the mayors
keep disputing the governor’s claims that they were all receiving it? And
most importantly, how many people had died? Eventually, the government
simply stopped responding to us. The only answers they gave were to the
reporters from US mainland media.



I vividly remember what happened one of those long days in the town of
Arecibo. People called WAPA to report that the town’s mayor, Carlos
Molina, had commandeered a power generator that FEMA had provided to a
shelter full of over eighty elderly people. Molina had moved the elders—
some of whom needed ventilators—into shelters without electricity in the
nearby towns of Barceloneta and Camuy. The generator went to a restaurant
called Arasibo Steakhouse, where, Molina claimed, it would be used to
prepare meals for hundreds of rescuers. We went to Arecibo to investigate.
    When we arrived at the Arasibo Steakhouse, we heard loud music and
found what seemed like a party. It turned out that the mayor’s employees
were using the generator for a political fund-raising party. Ricky Martin’s
“Livin’ la Vida Loca” was playing, and the employees were having a blast,
while a few roads ahead people still had no food and some were dying in
nearby communities. When we asked about the generator, a man became so
upset that he almost hit one of the reporters, Francisco Quiñones. That man
happened to be the president of the Municipal Assembly. Back at the station
that afternoon, we aired the report, but nothing came of it. Two days later,
Rosselló held a press conference in Arecibo and said he completely supported
Molina, who is his political ally. Nobody investigated afterward.
    That same attitude was on display for months from government officials
in different municipalities and in the central government. The truth was not
coming out. Without any news media, people were not informed. Many
deaths went unacknowledged by top government officials.
    Fifteen friends or relatives of mine died after Hurricane María. Fifteen.
My very best friend, Aileen, was a forty-two-year-old woman, head of human
resources for one of the island’s largest supermarket chains. Day after day
she had to deal with dozens of employees in need, some of whom had lost
their homes. She had no power or water at home. The stressful environment
took a toll on her, and she had a heart attack in her office. She died in front of
several employees and her thirteen-yearold daughter, whose school was
closed. Authorities sent her corpse to one of the infamous trailers outside the
Forensic Sciences Institute and left it there for almost two months. The
government claimed it had no personnel, and many families were in the same
situation. I kept calling and calling different government officials, asking to
have her body returned so we could have a proper funeral, but nothing
happened. Her body was finally returned to her husband and parents on
December 31. It was so badly decomposed, they had to cremate her
immediately. I didn’t get a chance to say goodbye to her. There was no
funeral.
    In the hurricane’s aftermath, the government put the number of deaths at
sixteen, then sixty-four; then a Harvard University study estimated that over
4,965 had died, and a study by George Washington University and the
government put the death toll at about three thousand. Everyone knows there
were many more. There are hundreds or maybe thousands of people who
suffered, who became ill or whose illnesses were exacerbated by the lack of
electricity, the impossibility of reaching a hospital in time because roads were
destroyed and rivers overflowed, or other problems caused by the hurricane.
These people will never be part of the official statistics.
    People, not the storm, created much of the chaos. Puerto Rico’s
infrastructure had been abandoned for decades amid the island’s recession
and local partisan politics, and people died because the government failed to
follow emergency plans established by previous administrations. Adding to
all that was the racism and neglect of the Trump administration, which
provided aid too slowly, and the corruption and ineptitude of the local
government. This was a true recipe for a disaster.
    One common denominator since the beginning of this emergency has
been the insensitivity, cynicism, and arrogance of officials close to Rosselló.
To maintain their message that only sixty-four people died from the storm,
when so many Puerto Ricans were burying their relatives, was a mockery. It
was disgusting to see elected officials and their relatives bragging on social
media about how the local government was doing a “good job” or saying that
because the dead do not vote, they are unimportant.
    For all those reasons each of us reporters on the radio questioned the
government’s lack of transparency. Officials tried to hide the dead, but the
stench of death prevented it. The dead were present, and their spirits
demanded justice and respect. We have to honor the memory of our dead; we
must tell their stories.



The collective pain touched almost everyone in one way or another,
regardless of their class or location. It didn’t matter if you lived in San Juan,
up in the mountains, or in the diaspora. If you didn’t lose a relative, you lost
an acquaintance, had a friend who was sick, or knew about a family that was
broken up as people fled the island. The pain was the same.
     The people of Puerto Rico maintain a perpetual feeling of mourning when
we think about what happened, about the dead, and about those left behind,
even if government officials never admit the pain we live with. We can see it
in how people act, in their absent gazes. We can see it in the sadness of those
who are still struggling to recover and those who lost a loved one. These are
the aftershocks of Hurricane María that no one can deny.
     The hurricane and its aftermath are a political story, an economic story,
and a colonial story, but for me, it was also a personal journey. It is a tragedy
of losing many friends and relatives, the undeniable desperation of seeing—
firsthand—people in need and the arrogance of politicians and government
officials. For me, it is also a story about resilience and survival.
     Looking back, I could say the aftershocks of Hurricane María changed
me. Change, after all, is the law of life. I do not want to keep looking at the
past, nor to think only about the future. We shouldn’t forget what happened
to us, but we must move on. We must be present in this moment.
     Now I, like most people on the island, am more conscious of the need to
prepare for disasters. But aside from saving canned food or storing water, one
of the hurricane’s better consequences is that we have realized we have to
build strong neighborhoods and build communities. You have to learn to be
friends, know your neighbors, and be able to help each other, as we all did
across the island.
     In that sense, the hurricane made me more open. It made me lose the fear
of expressing my emotions in public, something that is hard to do as a
reporter. But during these kinds of life-and-death experiences, objectivity
does not exist. You assume the side of the truth and must defend those in
need. When someone calls you live and tells you on the air, in the dark of
night, that he is going to commit suicide, or cries from hunger, as so often
happened to me working at WAPA, you learn to respond with your soul.
     I will always carry my experiences on the air in my soul. I am the same as
before the hurricane, yet I have also changed. I feel more alive and have a
strong commitment to help create a better Puerto Rico.
     Many months after the hurricane’s first anniversary, I was talking to one
of the nuns who saved the woman who was hiding from her abusive husband.
The woman is now a regular worker at a women’s shelter managed by the
nuns. She is strong, resilient, and helping others overcome abuse. Her
example taught me that we can overcome our fears and stand strong looking
at the future. I know that’s what we are doing in Puerto Rico.
     Like our torn flag after the storm, we are resilient. Like our flag, still
waving before the calmed sea, we must persevere.
                     MARÍA’S DEATH TOLL

      On the Crucial Role of Puerto Rico’s Investigative
                         Journalists

                               Carla Minet

Two days after Hurricane María made landfall, Puerto Rico’s Centro de
Periodismo Investigativo (CPI), or Center for Investigative Journalism,
regrouped. Everyone was so desperate to get to work that we all moved
mountains to meet at El Telégrafo in Santurce, one of the very few places
with Wi-Fi in San Juan. We started looking for a temporary newsroom,
because we faced the same issues as most other citizens: no power, no water,
no internet, no cell phone or landline service, no fuel, and no passable roads.
There were almost no media outlets, and only one radio station was left
standing. The government had collapsed, offering no official data and
statistics.
    After a week looking for places to work from, we ended up in the
government’s Center for Emergency Operations, which was the only place
where we could find reliable internet, phone service, and power, as well as
access to most government officials. We had to establish a whole new
editorial agenda, which ended up focusing on two issues: the death toll and
the hurricane’s impact on Puerto Rico’s colonial debt.
    With Joel Cintron, Luis Valentín, and Omaya Sosa Pascual as reporters,
our series about the debt reported on who owns it and what it meant in the
new posthurricane context. Two months before the hurricane hit, Puerto
Rico’s Fiscal Control Board—imposed by the US government in 2016 to
control the island’s finances for at least five years—approved a fiscal plan
setting forth how the island would repay its $74.7 billion debt and cover its
$49 billion in pension obligations. The plan was based on assumptions about
state expenditure that, in the hurricane’s aftermath, were no longer true.
Moreover, the plan did not take into account climate change risks, even
though the island falls within one of the most vulnerable areas of the
continent.
    Our reporting became a point of reference, providing dozens of US and
international news outlets the context to improve their stories and
acknowledge Puerto Rico’s systemic problems.
    But the most important story we did was on the hurricane’s death toll. It
became a top story in Puerto Rican, US, and international news.


            GOVERNMENT NUMBERS VS. GOOD SENSE

In the first seventy-two hours after the hurricane, Puerto Rican governor
Ricardo Rosselló kept saying that, at most, sixteen people had died. At that
point, our reporter Omaya Sosa Pascual had interviewed two doctors who
together had seen nine deaths in one day. The official statistics made no
sense.
    Several days after the hurricane, the CPI began publishing reports
revealing that dozens of additional confirmed deaths had not been reported to
the government, because there was no special protocol to handle deaths
during a disaster and because Puerto Rico’s agencies responded slowly.1
    Reporter Jeniffer Wiscovitch joined Omaya Sosa Pascual. For weeks, we
interviewed doctors, police officers, rescue workers, funeral home directors,
mayors and their staffs, and neighbors of the deceased. Based on their
information, we built our own database. We also requested information from
official sources, including the Health Department, the Security Department,
the Police Department, the Demographic Registry, US Health and Human
Services, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. But they
mostly had very little to say.
    We started to wonder how the bodies of dead people in Puerto Rico were
being handled, since there were no computer systems to register deaths and
many morgues had no electricity to preserve the corpses. Our reporters
collected reports and flyers about missing people and tips from the radio,
social media, and community leaders. At this point, we did most of our
reporting on the street in the most devastated areas; we knocked on doors and
drove on dangerous and difficult roads.
    One of the cases we reported was that of Teodoro Colón-Rodríguez, in
Orocovis, a rural town in the center of the island. Colón-Rodríguez had died
September 20. His corpse lay at home for three days before a funeral home
was able to fetch him and agree to bury him without a death certificate. No
government official responded to the family’s death notice. He is still
unaccounted for as a hurricane-related death in official records.
    Dependent on oxygen, Colón-Rodríguez was recovering at home from a
stroke he suffered the week before Hurricane María. He died in the middle of
the storm at the home of his daughter and granddaughter in Orocovis’s
Damián Abajo neighborhood. That same day, once the winds died down, his
son-in-law Angel Luis Vázquez took a machete and courageously walked
into town for help. After walking for four hours through landslides, a rising
river, and thick brush, he arrived at the police station, where he was told that
he could not move the body and that police could not recover the body
because the roads were cut off. The town funeral home, Orocovis Memorial,
also told him they could not get the body.
    Vázquez had to return home on foot, use a generator to turn on the air-
conditioning for the corpse, and move the whole family into the next room,
because the home’s second floor was completely destroyed. The next day
nobody arrived. Desperate, Vázquez walked back into town and went to the
Emergency Operations Center to plead for help. Although there was none of
the required paperwork available to move a body, municipal first responders
and the funeral staff agreed to help him. That same afternoon, a group of ten
men tried to reach the body to remove it from the home, but the rains
prevented them from reaching the residence, said rescue leader Willie Colón,
who was also a relative of the deceased.
    On the third day, the ten men returned at dawn and were able to remove
the decomposing body by carrying it and dragging it among landslides, trees,
and a flooding river so it could be buried. Neither the police nor a prosecutor
ever showed up to certify the death. The funeral home confirmed that the
Demographic Registry was not operating during those days.
    A doctor also never came, even though Colón-Rodríguez had been a
hospice patient at Aibonito’s Mennonite Hospital. His son-in-law had to tell
the funeral home that he was responsible for any problem that could arise
from moving the body without following a legal process.
    We found dozens of cases of like this one.
    Even though our first databases were rudimentary and at times seemed
useless, we kept digging and turned them into a real mine of stories that kept
growing every day. It had become almost a quest to prove that the
government was wrong.
    After reporters Omaya Sosa Pascual and Jeniffer Wiscovitch published
their series of stories about how the government was underreporting deaths,
the official general data released finally confirmed that there were over one
thousand more deaths in September and October than there had been in
2016.2 In December 2017, when the official number of deaths was sixty-four,
Governor Rosselló ordered a recount and thorough investigation.
    In November, as part of that process, our reporters started a collaboration
with Quartz (qz.com), disseminating an online form that collected hundreds
of stories from Puerto Ricans who said their relatives died because of
Hurricane María but were overlooked by the government.
    In February 2018, the CPI sued the director of the Puerto Rico
Demographic Registry, Wanda Llovet-Díaz, after multiple attempts to get her
agency to offer information about post-María deaths. The lawsuit stated that
it was a matter of “public information and of great public interest for the
people of Puerto Rico.”
    Specifically, the CPI asked Llovet-Díaz for detailed information about the
deaths recorded in Puerto Rico in 2017, in a complete database format, up
until the most recent entry in the Demographic Registry’s system; death
certificates issued in Puerto Rico from September 18 to the present; the
deaths registered, broken down by day and municipality; burial permits
granted since September 18; cremation permits granted since September 18;
and access to the notebooks in which permits granted to funeral and
cremation homes are recorded manually in each of Puerto Rico’s
Demographic Registry offices.
    Our team worked with the Inter American University Law School’s Legal
Clinic, which supports CPI litigation. CNN joined our lawsuit a few weeks
later. In the end, we won access to the causeof-death database, death
certificates, cremation and burial permits, among other documents.


            CROWDSOURCING AND COLLABORATIONS
The CPI did more than fifteen investigations or follow-up stories in eleven
months, and we developed the website hurricanemariasdead.com with a
database of 487 verified cases of people who died because of Hurricane
María, following CDC protocol. Our stories were republished or quoted more
than fifty times by national, US, and international media; we entered into
partnerships with the Miami Herald, CNN, the Associated Press, NPR’s
Latino USA, and qz.com; and we won a lawsuit against the Puerto Rican
government for official records. The study of the death toll ordered by the
governor was done, but the recount was not. At the CPI, we continue to
investigate with our independent databases.
    On the eve of the hurricane’s one-year anniversary, the CPI presented a
collaboration with Quartz and the Associated Press in which the names of the
dead were matched against government death records released by the Puerto
Rican government in response to a lawsuit by the CPI. Together, we
interviewed about three hundred families of the dead and reviewed the
records of nearly two hundred others using the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention’s criteria for certifying disaster-related deaths. The CPI led
the project, which took more than three months to complete and involved
dozens of volunteers, journalists, and experts.
    Most of the cases in the project’s database are considered indirect deaths,
meaning they were caused not by winds or flooding but by the lack of power,
drinking water, and medical supplies after the storm. The project did not
interview the patients’ doctors, and the death certificates themselves make no
link to María. The Puerto Rican government acknowledges that hundreds or
thousands of deaths should have been classified as storm-related but weren’t,
because of doctors’ lack of training on how to correctly fill out death
certificates. Participation in this survey was voluntary; therefore, the sample
was not representative of Puerto Rico’s demography and was not used to
extrapolate trends in causes of death and demographics.
    The project analyzed mortality databases from the Puerto Rico
Demographic Registry from 2014 to 2017 to calculate changes in
demographics and cause-of-death rates across the whole population using
standard grouping for fifty cause-of-death rankings from the International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10)
—the global standard epidemiological diagnostic tool.
    Adding to the death toll saga, CPI reporters worked on dozens of other
stories, inevitably related to the emergency and the recovery process. Among
other issues, these included the lack of legislation governing climate change
preparedness, systemic problems with hospitals, the energy players coming
down to Puerto Rico to get their share of the recovery pie, ongoing problems
with forensic corpse management, austerity measures on top of the recovery
process that affect the recovery itself, lack of official statistics updates such
as domestic violence, and the high number of FEMA denials for individual
assistance.
    Naturally, after the emergency stage passed, we shifted our focus, and
now the CPI team is concentrating on scrutinizing the recovery, which is one
of our biggest challenges moving on. The death toll investigation is still
central to many stories, especially those that try to explain why the healthcare
system collapsed the way it did and who was responsible for it. It’s also a
reference that serves as a checklist for future preparedness. We keep on
investigating of all that. More to come.
1. Omaya Sosa Pascual and Jeniffer Wiscovitch, “Dozens of Uncounted Deaths from
   Hurricane María Emerge in Puerto Rico,” Centro de Periodismo Investigativo,
   November        16,     2017,     http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2017/11/dozens-of-
   uncounted-deaths-from-hurricane-maria-emerge-in-puerto-rico/; Omaya Sosa Pascual
   and Jeniffer Wiscovitch, “Delayed and without Resources: Puerto Rico’s Police Did
   Little to Investigate Missing Persons after Hurricane María,” Centro de Periodismo
   Investigativo,                    December                     17,               2017,
   http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2017/12/delayed-and-without-resources-puerto-
   ricos-police-did-little-to-investigate-missing-persons-after-hurricane-maria/.
2. Omaya Sosa Pascual, “Nearly 1,000 More People Died in Puerto Rico after Hurricane
   María,”     Centro      de    Periodismo      Investigativo,   December     17,  2017,
   http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2017/12/nearly-1000-more-peopledied-in-puerto-
   rico-after-hurricane-maria/.
(NOTE FOR A FRIEND WHO WANTS TO COMMIT
     SUICIDE AFTER THE HURRICANE)1

                         Raquel Salas Rivera

         no one teaches us to accept death because death, that canned death,
             stays empty inside: the great hole of fuck it that wants to devour
         us. no one explains how we can become part of the impossible new
             world that is tomorrow, or how we are supposed to avoid falling
            into the perfect and permanent under eye circle we call facing the
         day. mana, how not to understand? that is the question i avoid with
        the organizational fervor of a rescue team that never arrives, but i’ll
        tell you this: desire isn’t always followed by death. sometimes i run
          into you in the street and you shine like an orb or a solar lamp, but
        you are still worth more than all the generators (in case you haven’t
        been told a thousand times). y other times, without tilde, i. i. i. other
times, your words reach me like a fundraiser that explodes and temporalizes
                     truth, like an espachurrao (squashed? flattened? spread?)
         aguacate on the sidewalk, green-grey from so much loving. we first
          have to find better answers than these automatic things. i don’t say
          this to add responsibilities, but rather so that you know, sister, that
            the attempted murder comes from within, like the last refuge of a
         cowardly colonialism. come here and i’ll give you food and shelter
        while i have it, que te añoño, will (cuddle? spoil? hold and rock and
          sing?) you, and will duplicate the hugs. i can’t heal the fathomless,
              but what kind of world would this be without you? what kind of
           world is this that harrasses you? without rescue, let’s speak of the
             future. not as realists, not as visionaries, let’s speak of the future
                   because we will find it in a moth-eaten rug, in the tea of the
                     drunken, in the buenos días, there is coffee of a confused
                           and sincere embrace. we have a bed and we remember.
                                                                  yours forever,


                                                                                     raquel2


1 From while they sleep (under the bed is another country) (Birds, LLC, 2019) and first
  published in Slice Magazine.
2 (nota para una amiga que desea suicidarse después del huracán) nadie nos enseña a
  aceptar la muerte porque la muerte, esa muerte de latita, queda vacía en nosotros: el
  gran hueco del carajo que nos quiere devorar. nadie nos dice como podemos integrarnos
  al nuevo mundo imposible del mañana, como se supone que evitemos caer en el círculo
  perfecto de una ojera permanente que llamamos darle cara al día. mana, ¿cómo no
  entenderlo? esa es la pregunta que evito con el fervor organizativo de un equipo de
  rescate que nunca llega, pero te voy a decir esto: después del deseo, no siempre viene la
  muerte. a veces te encuentro por la calle y brillas como astro o como lámpara solar,
  pero igual vales más que todos los generadores (por si no te lo han dicho mil veces). y
  otras veces, sin tilde, i.i.i. otras veces, me llegan tus palabras como un recogido de
  fondos que explota y temporaliza la verdad, como un aguacate espachurrao en la acera,
  verdegris de tanto amar. nos toca primero encontrar contestaciones mejores que estas
  mierdas automáticas. no lo digo por añadir responsabilidades, sino para que sepas que,
  hermana, el intento de matarnos viene desde adentro como último refugio de un
  colonialismo cobarde. vente pacá, que te doy comida y albergue mientras la tenga, que
  te añoño y te duplico los abrazos. no podré sanar lo insondable, pero qué mundo sería
  este sin tí. qué mundo este que te acosa. sin rescate, hablemos del futuro. ni realistas, ni
  visionarios, hablemos del futuro porque lo encontraremos en la alfombra carcomida, en
  el té de campanilla, en el buenos días, hay café de un abrazo confuso y sincero. tenemos
  cama y memoria.
       tuya para siempre,
       raquel
                “I’M QUITE COMFORTABLE”

           Abandonment and Resignation after María

                        Benjamín Torres Gotay

Luis Alberto is about forty years old, a single father, unemployed, who lives
in a small wooden house along with his ailing mother, his fourteen-year-old
son, and a brother, on the banks of the gorgeous Caonillas River, in Utuado.
He speaks in a soft, almost inaudible voice. He answers questions in
monosyllables, murmurs, and gestures. He tends to lower his eyes when
speaking.
     One could guess that he is not the talking type or that he simply was not
in the mood to talk the day I met him at his home, at least six weeks after
Hurricane María had ravaged his and most of his neighbors’ homes. We
journalists meet people like that all the time. Not everybody is eager to speak
to a notebook-carrying stranger, who, on top of that, is also accompanied by
another stranger, this one carrying an intimidating camera. But my guess is
that there was something else.
     He impressed on me the idea that he was a man utterly overwhelmed by
the circumstances of his life. That, certainly, was a part of what I had seen in
him. But I also felt that there was something else. There had to be something
else.
     I never wrote down his last name. I never put him in a story. I spoke to
him for no more than twenty minutes. I stopped the attempted interview when
it was clear it was going nowhere. We exchanged courtesies and I left, along
with my colleague, the photographer/videographer Luis Alcalá del Olmo. We
left Luis Alberto’s house feeling a bit confused, not understanding at all what
we had just heard from him, even feeling a little bit angry with him.
     Only half of what had been Luis Alberto’s modest house remained; the
other half was a pile of debris occupying most of his patio. He had no
running water and no electricity (his barrio had to wait more than nine
months before getting its power back). His mother had suffered a fall that left
her unable to walk. His son, who had ADD and emotional problems, had not
had access to his medications since the hurricane.
     His desperate situation was very clear to me: the brutal aftermath of
María was closing in on Luis Alberto and his family like a giant fist that was
about to crush them mercilessly. For food, Luis Alberto and his family
depended on charity from an NGO. He gathered water from the nearby river.
Neither he nor his brother had a job or any way to earn a living in those
incredibly hard post-María days. He depended completely on others’ help,
and there were not at that critical moment many “others” to offer help deep in
the mountains of Utuado, in one of the most isolated parts of the island,
where most roads were still blocked by mudslides. He had been abandoned
by the state, as were thousands of others in those terrible weeks and months.
His life was hanging by a thread.
     But when I asked him how he was coping with the dire situation, how he
felt, what he expected from the authorities, if he did in fact feel abandoned,
how he expected to provide for his son and for his mother, he always gave
the same answer: “Estoy bastante cómodo,” he said. “I’m quite comfortable.”
     That’s why I stopped the interview.
     By the time I met Luis Alberto, I had already spoken with dozens of
people affected by María. In the following months, many more interviews
would come. I spoke to many people who had lost everything, including their
loved ones. Eventually, all of Puerto Rico confirmed what up to that point
was already evident: that the state response was grossly insufficient. Most of
the people affected by María, as the statistics and official reports show, had
not received adequate assistance, if any.1 In many cases, months had passed
before any government help arrived.
     They had been, in simple and plain words, abandoned by those who were
supposed to take care of them. But despite all that, few of them expressed the
feeling that they had been abandoned or that they felt neglected by the
authorities. In saying he was “quite comfortable,” Luis Alberto may be an
extreme example. But his words were not that different from those I heard in
many other parts of the island, from people in similar circumstances or even
from senior government officials.
     For all of them, the prevailing attitude after the storm seemed to be “it
could be worse.”
     That was exactly the case with doña Ida Nieves, a petite seventynine-
year-old widow, and mother of fifteen, whom I met at her small wooden
house in Barrio Marín, in Patillas, an isolated and mountainous community
that is one of the poorest on the whole island. Doña Ida lives with one of her
sons, who is missing an eye and cannot work. She lives on a monthly welfare
check of $180. I went to her house five months after María. There was still no
electricity, nor any sign of when it was going to be restored.
     Hurricane María ripped off part of her home’s roof, which left her with
only one bedroom and a living room. Her son had to move his bed to the
living room. Doña Ida had to cover her bed in plastic because in Barrio Marín
it rains almost every day; the water goes through the tarped roof and soaks
the bed. The repairs to her house were estimated at over $7,000. FEMA had
given her a little over $2,000.
     “I’m OK with that,” doña Ida said, showing no anger. “For me, receiving
nothing would have been worse. What am I going to do, since I have no job,
nor does my son, who has only one eye?” She shrugged and gave a toothless
smile.
     During this time, I also met doña Eugenia Cruz, eighty-one years old, at
her house in Barrio Mameyes in Jayuya. She lives with two of her six
children in a patched wooden house that has been lived in for several
generations by her late husband’s family. The house lost most of its roof,
which had been replaced by a tarp that, on sunny days, produced a blue glow
that filled the house and on rainy days let the water go through and soak the
rooms. FEMA denied them any assistance because, like thousands of families
in Puerto Rico, doña Eugenia and her family had no documentation to prove
that the land they had inhabited for generations was theirs.
     Doña Eugenia’s son, Ángel, who was the only person in the household
with a salary—if we can call $25 a day picking vegetables at a local farm a
salary—said he had no money to repair the roof, nor any chance of getting it.
“What I earn is for the basic things,” he said. But then again, when asked
how he felt about the way he and his family were being treated by the US and
Puerto Rican authorities, he responded, “They are doing what they can.”
     At this point, there is not much left to say about Hurricane María, but no
doubt plenty to understand. First, we need to understand the attitude of
resignation shown by much of the population in the face of the neglect or
outright discrimination by the governments of the United States and Puerto
Rico. To begin with, the fact that there was neglect has long ceased to be a
matter of interpretation. Several official reports from federal agencies, as well
as news analysis in Puerto Rico and the US mainland, make it clear that
Puerto Rico did not receive the same attention or assistance as Texas,
Louisiana, and Florida in the aftermath of major natural disasters.
    Perhaps the most important report was published by FEMA itself, in June
2018, in which the agency acknowledged that it was sorely unprepared for
María, that it had a shortage of supplies in its Puerto Rico warehouse when
María hit, that it failed to deploy enough personnel to the island once the
disaster had begun, and that it could not contain the humanitarian crisis that
spread throughout the island in the following weeks and months.2
    I saw this with my own eyes many times: FEMA, military personnel, and,
very rarely, Puerto Rico’s government officials went to the towns of what we
call la montaña, in the mountainous center of the island, to deliver aid. But
only rarely did they go any farther than the center of town, leaving the vast
rural areas unattended, sometimes for weeks. Mayors received the goods, but
because multiple roads were blocked by mudslides or because they had no
fuel for their own trucks, they could not deliver the supplies to the most
isolated areas. The residents of the isolated areas, of course, also had no way
of going to town to pick up the goods.
    In March 2018 the news site Politico published an in-depth article that
said that nine days after disaster struck, FEMA had approved $141.8 million
in individual assistance to Hurricane Harvey victims in Texas versus $6.2
million to those affected by María in Puerto Rico.3 The greater Houston area
affected by Harvey had at the time of the hurricane a population close to six
million people. Puerto Rico had 3.4 million people. Also, during those first
nine days, according to the Politico analysis, FEMA provided 5.1 million
meals, 4.5 million liters of water, and over twenty thousand tarps to Houston
residents. During the same period in Puerto Rico, on the other hand, residents
received 1.6 million meals, 2.8 million liters of water, and roughly five
thousand tarps.
    Politico also demonstrated that in the first nine days after Harvey, there
were thirty thousand federal personnel in the Houston area, while in the same
period only ten thousand had been deployed to Puerto Rico. Also, FEMA
approved permanent disaster work for Texas in ten days, compared with
forty-three for Puerto Rico.
    I myself published a piece in El Nuevo Día that proved that Puerto Ricans
received assistance that was, on average, inferior to that received by the
victims of eight of the eleven most destructive hurricanes since Katrina in
2005, even though María was the third-costliest hurricane to have hit any US
state or territory in the last thirteen years.4
    The assistance received by María’s victims in Puerto Rico was less than
what was received by the victims of Katrina in Louisiana; Harvey, Ike, Alex,
and Rita in Texas; Sandy in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and
Maryland; Irene in North Carolina; and Matthew in Florida. The only US
residents who received less monetary assistance than those in Puerto Rico
were those affected by Hurricanes Wilma and Irma in Florida.
    The difference was substantial, in some cases. For example, those
affected by Katrina received on average $9,016, and those affected by Sandy,
$9,265. In both cases, the assistance is more than three times the average
$2,600 received by the residents of Puerto Rico. According to FEMA, this
inequality reflected differences in the cost of living between the US states and
the territory of Puerto Rico. Those differences do exist, but they are not
substantial enough to explain the inequality in the assistance approved to
Puerto Rico’s residents, 100 percent of whom were affected, one way or the
other, by María.
    While this neglect was taking place, Donald Trump, who visited Puerto
Rico fourteen days after the storm (he went to Texas twice in the first eight
days of their emergency), was fuming publicly about the impact that Puerto
Rico’s recovery was going to have on the federal budget, feuding with the
mayor of San Juan, Carmen Yulín Cruz, and saying things like “Puerto
Ricans want everything done for them.”5
    During the first weekend after the storm, when Puerto Rico was coping
with some of the most terrible moments of its history, Trump was firing off
tweets about his feud with the NFL players who chose to kneel during the US
national anthem. According to the aforementioned Politico article, those
tweets sent “a subtle, yet important message” to the federal bureaucracy:
Puerto Rico was not a priority. What happened afterward proved that this
analysis was right on target.
     It’s been said that María confronted Puerto Rico with its ugliest realities,
with parts of our own selves we would have never wanted to see. It made
visible the supposedly hidden poverty—hidden, that is, for those who don’t
want to see what doesn’t fit their beliefs about who they are. The hurricane
unearthed colonialism to its most rotten and despicable core. It showed how
alone we are as a society and as a people. It revealed the nakedness of our
government institutions and bloated agencies that, despite their enormous
budgets, proved unfit to deal with a catastrophe of this magnitude.
     And, above all, it revealed the defenselessness and the abandonment of
the most vulnerable sectors of our society. It haunts me that María unveiled
not only the physical and visible aspects of that vulnerability but also the
mental and spiritual solitude that people experienced. This is why it was so
hard for many of the people in Puerto Rico to recognize that they had been
abandoned and discriminated against.
     We had been indoctrinated for generations with the notion that there
would always be a father figure there to protect us, be it the colonial
government of Puerto Rico or the almighty americano. Those notions had
been hammered into our minds since the dawn of the US invasion, more than
a hundred years ago.
     In the moment of truth that María thrust upon us, we were left with very
little to show for all that we were made to believe for more than a century.
     Dumbfounded by such an unexpected turn of events, people could only
react with statements of shock like “I’m quite comfortable,” “receiving
nothing would have been worse,” or “they are doing what they can.” Not to
mention comments from senior government officials, beginning with
Governor Rosselló and resident commissioner Jennifer González. Both said
that the federal government had given Puerto Rico all it had asked for. Not to
mention, either, the scores of people saying publicly that “Haiti would have
received zero assistance,” which, as we all know, is not only cruel but also
very ignorant.
     The ugly, unpalatable truth that we were abandoned, that we were
forgotten, that we were not important to the US government did not fit, could
not fit, in the minds of most people in Puerto Rico. It was inconceivable for
them. Hence, María taught us how deep the seed of colonialism is planted
inside us and of how little importance we are to the empire.
    Perhaps we can say that María, at least, made us understand that we can
only count on ourselves.
    We’ll have to wait until the next crisis to know for sure. I, for one, am not
optimistic.
1. Frances Robles, “FEMA Was Sorely Unprepared for Puerto Rico Hurricane, Report
   Says,” New York Times, July 12, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/12/us/fema-
   puerto-rico-Maria.html.
2. FEMA, 2017 Hurricane Season FEMA After-Action Report, July 12, 2018.
3. Danny Vinik, “How Trump Favored Texas over Puerto Rico,” Politico, March, 27,
   2018, https://www.politico.com/story/2018/03/27/donald-trump-fema-hurricane-maria-
   response-480557.
4. Benjamin Torres Gotay, “Ayuda para la isla tras María fue inferior a otros territorios
   de       EE.UU.,”        El      Nuevo        Día,      March        26,        2018,
   https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/locales/nota/ayudaparalaislatrasMariafueinferioraotrosterritorios
   2409397/.
5. Amanda Holpuch and David Smith, “Trump Attacks Puerto Rico Mayor: ‘They Want
   Everything     Done     for   Them,’”      Guardian,     September      30,     2017,
   https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/sep/30/donald-trump-attacks-puerto-rico-
   mayor-carmen-yulin-cruz.
             NARRATING THE UNNAMEABLE

                               Eduardo Lalo

In On the Natural History of Destruction, W. G. Sebald recalls reading
somewhere that the Allied bombing of Dresden created an artificial
hurricane. Dresden had no military bases and was not a military target. Its
population was largely civilian. The war was already lost for the Germans,
but Dresden was nevertheless bombed, mainly by the British. And the
number of bombs they dropped on the city was just incredible. The flames
were calculated to be more than a kilometer high; that’s almost three-quarters
of a mile. Since fire is a phenomenon of oxygen, there were hurricane-force
winds within the city. After the bombing, corpses were found in the public
fountains; it became so hot that people went in them to try to survive. And
they had been cooked, boiled like chickens.
    After the bombing, and for many years after that, the city was in total
ruin. Sebald quotes a British journalist who stayed in Dresden shortly after
the war. The journalist said that when he traveled on the city’s tramway, he
could tell who had survived the bombing and who had not. The survivors
never looked out the window. I think that passage is pertinent now and very
relevant to what I want to say. “To narrate something, you have to see it,”
and one of the things that happened to us after September 20, 2017, is that for
many weeks we could see very little.
    In fact, when I got the first calls from friends outside Puerto Rico, I asked
them, “What is happening?” They were the first ones to tell us the
seriousness of the situation. During a hurricane, you don’t see anything. You
see outside your window. That’s your horizon at that moment. And if you
have to secure yourself in a bathroom as the hurricane passes, you see even
less. After that, you only see fallen trees and debris.
    The first or second day after the storm, I rode my bicycle from where I
live on the outskirts of San Juan to the university, where I have worked for
more than thirty years. That’s when I saw how it was. Traffic completely
chaotic. Lampposts, trees, whatever, in the middle of the street. I arrived at
the front of the university, which was closed, and I saw the buildings for the
first time, because they had had trees in front before, and now they weren’t
there. I remember going into Río Piedras, which is the sector of San Juan
where the university is, and feeling the silence. It was not because there
weren’t people around; in fact, there were. But there were no birds, and it’s
the most uncanny feeling you can have, because that’s the sound of death.
Everything was dying.
     It’s difficult to tell the story because from day one whatever came from
the government was lies. At first, maybe you do an act of faith in extreme
situations, you try to believe whatever they’re saying. Very quickly I saw a
pattern develop: anyone from the government who spoke publicly, and there
were many in the first weeks, always had to mention the governor. I soon
realized that even while people had no water, food, or electricity, while
people were dying in hospitals and elsewhere, the governor’s public relations
people and government functionaries had decided to use the hurricane to try
to win the next election in three years. Everything its representatives said was
later found to be a lie.
     So, when I began writing again—my column in El Nuevo Día—or
answering interviews from journalists in Puerto Rico or elsewhere, I tried to
rigorously practice my profession. Literature is a special world. It tries to
express tragedy, but the real object of the literary word is the unnameable.
You could put into words all the government’s irresponsibility and its
corruption. And people do that every day. But you cannot use words to
capture pain, especially collective pain. Our pain is not only a personal but
also a historical pain. It’s a pain that is not seen, or that is seen as that of a
marginal society whose humanity is undervalued. That’s not only because
Puerto Rico remains a US colony, but also because our region, the Caribbean,
is considered second class. Yet the modern world we know today started in
the Caribbean. What we have today is what started October 12, 1492. The
Caribbean was the great laboratory for colonialism and imperialism
everywhere else. That’s why the Spanish conquest of Peru and Mexico was
so successful: they knew already how it was done; they had thirty years of
experience in the Caribbean to know what worked.
     I try not to express what was painful but to use words to point at
something that cannot be put into words. The extent of irresponsibility that
we have suffered from the government of Puerto Rico, and many of its
leaders, and also from the US government. It’s impossible to express, it’s
unnameable. It was recently calculated that during the time when Trump
visited for a few hours, in October 2017, at least eighteen people died each
day from the hurricane. The governor told him then that a total of only
sixteen people had died from the storm, but just in that day, more people died
than that. But the tragedy is not only the number of deaths; it’s not a contest
of numbers. It’s the abandonment of a country. The United States used Puerto
Rico for its own purposes for more than one hundred years and, in this
critical moment, felt that it was in its best interests to leave it behind. That’s
what colonialism is all about. What is sovereignty but the capacity, the
power, to design yourself? To make your own plans. That’s exactly what we
don’t have.
     And American “generosity” is channeled to us according to US priorities,
not what is useful to Puerto Rico. We live in a very different situation from
that of the fifty states; we are a different country. We are a different nation.
To try to put Puerto Rico within the framework of American policy just
doesn’t work. It’s not a question of sending FEMA dollars; it’s a question of
changing Puerto Rican society to make it more efficient and self-sufficient.
And that’s not the project of colonialism. The project of colonialism is
dependency. This hurricane is being used by government officials in Puerto
Rico and the United States to increase that dependency. That’s exactly the
opposite of being prepared for an emergency. You can send many millions of
dollars, but it will be given to American companies, to contractors that are
only there for the money. Not to build a country, not to improve society.
They will take the money to American banks immediately. We are not
receiving more than remedial aid, and we are being used once again.
     To tell a story is to discover its real meaning. For me, meaning is
encircled here by repetition. We have seen the same thing every day for the
past century. Now a whole system of profiteers is being created. Hurricanes
have become an economic asset, and that’s the sad story of María and Puerto
Rico. Of course, there are forces opposing this, but that’s the real, less visible
story.
          IF A TREE FALLS IN AN ISLAND

             The Metaphysics of Colonialism1

                     Ana Portnoy Brimmer

                                                      Ah, what an age it is
                                When to speak of trees is almost a crime
                               For it is a kind of silence about injustice!
                                                             —Bertolt Brecht

but even the trees spoke
snapping like dry bones / under the weighty foot of weather

sparking and slung over power lines
last attempt at sustained flight / sputtering sap and blood

branches a thousand arms reaching / routed / rotting
bark marbled fungus and termite

consider the fright of a flamboyán
skirts upturned

robbed of red / roots ripped
from the earth’s scalp

consider the cry / of a carambola
struck down / stripped bare
    starfruit putrid sweet
    of the ground / lost aspiring body of the cosmos

    consider the plight of a plantain
    self-suffocated / wrapped in its own leaf / hijos dying inside

    sprouting back like jagged teeth
    twisting arthritic fingers / both growing and graves

    to not speak of trees now / when even the trees
    have spoken / is the deadliest of silences

    for when a tree falls in an island / and the world
    is around to hear it / the island drowns

    for a tree is no longer a tree / and semantics like leaves change
    it is memory burnt into body / 7 months piled up on a sidewalk

    blocking the street / at your doorstep
    blighted wood and abandonment

    it is death at its slowest / an unblinking mirror
    steadfast rustle / of gutting truth

    that if a people fall in an island /and the world is around to hear it
    we make a sound—but only the ocean responds / with a swallow


1 Approaching a year since hurricane María’s passing over Puerto Rico, on September
  20, 2017.
 THIS WAS MEANT TO BE A HURRICANE DIARY

                       Beatriz Llenín Figueroa

October 20, 2017

1
My idea of keeping a hurricane diary lasted only a short while—about as
much time as it took me to remember that I had to fetch water from the well
in front of the washing machine repair shop. The municipality’s water station
was unavailable the three times I tried there.

2
After the hurricane, only the Paleolithic humans who still had Telefónica
landlines could call and be called. Telefónica was a public phone company
that was privatized by the governor’s daddy in the 1990s. Puerto Ricans must
adhere to the march of progress led by fathers and sons, right?
    The rest of us, privately owned, satellite-controlled creatures, could only
report, “I saw her and she’s OK.” After a brief pause, we added explanatory
clauses like:
    driving by in the car;
    standing in the (eternal) line at the gas station;
    exiting the supermarket with two cans of tuna;
    at her home, since I had enough gas and her neighbors had cleared the
        way.
    Or, with the anguish of a still unknown loss, we said, and still do, “I have
        not seen her.” To this, we do not add explanations. Can silence
        explain the agony?
    “How are you?” We barely have the courage to say this as we do when
we really ask that question. Much less do we have the courage to answer.
“Good.” We lie. We know it. This pain, so oceanic, reduces us to the “good”
we can be outwardly, viewed from a safe distance and, especially, considered
in proportion to the thousands of people already dead or on their way to
dying because of this politico-natural catastrophe.

3
Over this past month, I read a long novel in short spurts stolen from a life
besieged by survival. It is a historical novel about the murder of people and
socialist utopias, written less than a decade ago. It is also yet another novel
narrated from men’s perspectives, although women are just as much
protagonists as men are in the story of “really existing socialism.” Being,
quite literally, partners of men is not enough for women to avoid their
figuration in the novel as decorative objects, vilified as seductresses or
victimized as fools.
    The constant presence of dogs is the novel’s only redeeming quality,
although dogs are not main characters either. The novel is about several men,
one of whom loves dogs, and its title closely resembles that phrase.
(Apparently, women do not love them. In my house, however, we live
according to the exact opposite principle, which is partly why we have
remained connected to life. Has someone in government as much as thought
about how many dogs have died this past month?)

4
Very little about the hurricane is natural. This is mass murder. Of peoples and
utopias, just like in the novel. But Trotsky’s assassination no longer needs to
be ordered from the other side of the planet. It has also become superfluous to
assemble—as happens in other, profuse stories of murdering people and
utopias—a complicated structure of spies and informants to carry out a coup
d’état in favor of a military strongman who will rule in the US empire’s
interests. To show that our lives are worthless, it is enough for a hurricane,
strengthened disproportionately by the systematic exploitation of the planet
led precisely by that empire, to churn atop an ancient colony.

5
A month on, but it has been years. Decades. This is a pain without time. So
many of us don’t even have the spaces (homes, plazas, community centers)
where we used to cry anymore.
    This is also a pain that cannot be written. So many bubbles of falsehood
have burst that there is no language to encompass them. Even if before the
hurricane we knew the lie of Puerto Rico’s status as a US “commonwealth,”
of its self-government, of the gringos’ benevolent authority, of the
“development” and “progress” that characterize Puerto Rico’s socioeconomic
and political model, the most colossal bubble burst is the one that allowed me
to think—and write—as if “I know all this is a lie.” I now understand the
enormous vanity entailed in thinking and writing as someone disabused, as
someone who knows what is true: our miserable history of enslavement,
exploitation, discrimination, dependency, corruption, self-sabotage. After the
hurricane, I discover, to my ineffable pain, that the highways, gasoline, cell
phones, cement light posts, shiny signs and billboards of tax-exempt
corporate chains—that all these things can disguise the misery, and in fact
have disguised it for a long time, even though we “knew” they didn’t.

6
Before I can finish crying over the presence of soldiers with huge machine-
guns in front of a gas station in Mayagüez, I arrive at a store where a very
self-confident Boricua citizen howls that “el boricua está cabrón” and that in
this country we need a few gunshots to get people in line.
    I feel so, so much terror.

7
Dear sir in whose opinion el boricua está cabrón, if I am allowed to dream
that you might read these lines, please, look to the Boricuas working in the
Brigada Solidaria del Oeste (West Solidarity Brigade) and producing art on
the street affirming that Borikén florece (Puerto Rico blooms). When, in one
of the Brigada’s weekly meetings, I thanked each person I greeted, they all
answered, “For what?” Isn’t this the “getting in line” we need?
    I feel so, so much love.

8
Governor, sir, if you had died, would the death count be, at last, at least,
forty-nine?
9
I owe nothing, nothing at all, to the United States of America, nor to its
capitalists or any investment firm, nor to the wealthy who get all kinds of tax
breaks in this colony cursed by history. It is the United States of America that
has built itself on the basis of our misery and, yes, of our death. This death
includes our dying for the archipelago because we have to leave, against our
will.
     Thus, I do not want aid because Puerto Ricans are “American citizens.”
My citizenship is freedom. The gringo citizenship in this country is a war
game, a first-world war game, in itself decided on and bestowed at the
empire’s convenience. The United States of America owes Puerto Rico: that
is the unpayable debt.
     Because of this, because Puerto Rico, like the rest of the Caribbean, has
never seen a single cent in reparations for the centuries of exploitation that
created the centers of power in Europe and North America, the United States
of America has the historical, ethical, and political obligation to pay. This is
not “aid.” It is a debt for which any imperial aid disbursement will always be
lacking, for it represents nothing more than an obscene cover-up.

10
To evoke my dear friend Ariadna Godreau Aubert in her book Las propias:
my supranational aspirations have nothing to do with the United States of
Power. On the contrary, my aspirations lie where we ignite our desire to
begin from and give birth to so many human and nonhuman lives, bound
together by the most abject disinterest for power. Never am I more
Caribbean, Antillean, Latin American, wherever we may be, than today. I live
and die with wounds that will never finish closing. And I will always stand in
the lines we make to care for us and, hopefully, to heal us.
           ANOTHER HAPHAZARD GESTURE

                        Sofía Gallisá Muriente




Author’s Note: What follows are partial notes taken in the weeks after the
hurricane as part of a useless effort to process the scale of what we lost and
what we gained. Some were written on rainy days to soothe the sadness of
knowing there were homes that still had no roofs, roads that kept collapsing,
and floods that kept recurring. Some were written on Facebook with the help
of others who shared experiences and rumors they had heard. Others were
written simply to remember conversations.
    Some of these lists and images were previously published in 2018 in the
zine Contra Viento y María, edited by La Piscina Editorial in Tenerife, as
part of a project of the Comité de Cariño Criollo, to support Puerto Rican
cultural workers recovering from the hurricane. They have been minimally
edited.
                       GONE WITH MARÍA

The Property Registry
The Department of Justice
The Bayamón Court
La Junta (the bar)
The Polygraphic Triennial
Aymat Doughnuts (until the power came back)
The Nuyorican Poet’s Café
El Baoricua restaurant
La Chiwinha fair trade store
Fifty-nine employees from GFR Media
Plaza Palma Real in Humacao
The fish farm in Maricao
The boardwalk in La Esperanza, Vieques
La Nasa (the bar, but it reopened next door)
Latte que Latte café (though it reappeared sometime later)
The restaurants Galloway’s and El Pirata in Boquerón (but they were both
    rebuilt)
The plane sculpture in a rotunda in Guaynabo
The space rocket in the Science Park in Bayamón
Part of the collection of Puerto Rican art from the library of the School of
    Arts and Design
The ficuses in the square of Old San Juan where people played dominoes
    and parrots nested
The parrots that used to screech in front of the University of Puerto
    Rico’s Río Piedras campus
The archives of Remi the clown
The professional basketball and volleyball seasons
Las Justas (the college sports championship)
Fresh fruit (for a while)
The beaches of Condado, Ocean Park, and Escambrón (which were toxic
    for months)
The restaurant El Nilo in Río Piedras (it came back!)
The Natatorium
The Institute of Puerto Rican Culture’s Office of Patrimony
The Santiago Iglesias Pantín Labor Archive at the University of Humacao
Sistema TV
The Vico C concert
The Ricardo Arjona concert (at least some good news)
The sales tax on food (for a limited time)
La Garita bar in La Perla (but they rebuilt bigger and stronger)
Whatever dignity the Supermax grocery in Old San Juan had left
The expert witness in my mom’s robbery case
The print edition of Claridad newsweekly (for a couple of issues)
The chimney of an abandoned sugar plantation next to the Caguas
    Walmart
The solar panels from Paseo Puerta de Tierra and Cuartel de Ballajá
The motel El Panamericano in Hatillo
An antenna on the radio telescope in Arecibo
The caves in Camuy (for at least thirty years)
Punta Ballena beach
Two million chickens
THINGS I’M HAPPY MARÍA TOOK
            Fences
           Billboards
           Stoplights
          My schedule
          “Normality”
     The shame in being sad
    LOST TO MARÍA

        Marilú’s mom
        Martín’s mom
        Alicia’s mom
        Rubén’s mom
Belisa and Luis Alberto’s dad
         Luis’s dad
        Pablo’s uncle
                        BARAHONA, MOROVIS

The night Alice’s dad died, he had to describe his stroke symptoms over the
phone to 911 so they would pick him up, after they ignored his daughter’s
calls. He had been released that morning from a hospital running on
generators that was rationing oxygen, during the post-Irma, pre-María
blackout. Alice accompanied him to the hospital, and at the very moment the
old man died, his grandson Yandel, who was at home, became pale and
vomited, and a flock of bluebirds flew out from among the mogotes (hills).
Alice waited in the hospital for her brothers, but they trusted that she would
call them if something was wrong. The phones weren’t working, so no one
found out in time to say goodbye. The nurse waited with Alice until it was
late. In the funeral home, Alice’s sons were scandalized when they saw their
grandfather with makeup on. “He would never do that. He’s not a fag.”
                            WHO’S WORSE?

People in San Juan say people elsewhere on the island are the ones who are
really suffering. People elsewhere on the island say that things are worse in
San Juan than in the countryside, because of the stress.
    Everyone thinks Vieques has collapsed, but a friend who lives there says
there are assemblies in the public square every day and that a young woman
got up at one of them to yell at the mayor for walking around drunk while
alcohol sales are prohibited. I’ve also heard power generators were stolen at
the morgue and the hospital. How do you hide one of those?
    A month after María, in Sabana Grande, there was power, water, internet,
well-stocked supermarkets, clean streets, open Chinese ice-cream shops, and
even Halloween decorations.
    In San Sebastián they started their own power authority with retired
electricians and figured a way out.
    In Adjuntas they’re still installing solar panels, for the next one.
    In El Yunque National Forest there’s a road where a couple of utility
poles fell down that supplied electricity to a neighborhood, but now the
federal government doesn’t want to restore them because they’re in a natural
reserve.
    In Utuado there are neighborhoods that were land occupations and still
have no power. Some say they’re trying to get people to leave to set up
Airbnbs.
    In Old San Juan and Puerta de Tierra the population of addicts and
homeless people has grown.
    I want to spend the next hurricane in Cabo Rojo. The mayor there went
door to door loaning his satellite phone to people so they could call their
families and tell them they were all right.
                               QUESTIONS
I’ve learned that when saying hello, you don’t have to ask How are you?
   I’ve also learned that, sometimes, to answer the question Who won the
game last night? you have to check your phone casually, as if keeping it
charged and getting a signal weren’t a big deal.
                              MARÍA DAYS

100 percent probability of rain (it’s one of the few certainties),
Strong and constant twists and turns,
Gusts of wind, bursts of sounds, in the body. Ráfagas.
The calm eye of the storm passed by a long time ago, but the hurricane hasn’t
     left.
Where it floods once, it floods ten times.
Where power comes back, it might not stay.
Where a bridge has collapsed, sometimes chairs and a bonfire pop up.
Where people haven’t seen FEMA, they’ve seen friends, relatives, curious
     strangers, the press, the diaspora, and the municipal government.
Where there once was, now remains.
From the sky, we are back to looking green.
At night, we’re barely visible.
I heard we’re in a struggle against the light,
the rupture won’t last, we must plant seeds.
I also heard that we should burn all flags.
“There’s something gone from the mountains,” says Lorraine.
“We have to study New Orleans,” say people at La Cucina.
“There’s multiplicity, but we’re here,” says Nibia.
“There are things you have to let collapse,” says Gilberto.
“You need a rock-solid stomach to deal with this country,”
said my dad, since before the storm.
       PART III
Representing the Disaster
                 OUR FELLOW AMERICANS

  Why Calling Puerto Ricans “Americans” Will Not Save
                        Them1

                     Frances Negrón-Muntaner

In September 2017, the category 4 hurricane María obliterated Puerto Rico’s
electrical grid, destroyed or damaged half a million homes, and killed at least
three thousand people. Nearly four months afterwards, close to half the
island’s households remained in the dark, and one hundred and fifty thousand
people were forced to leave. A year later, partial blackouts remained
common, and 4 percent of Puerto Rican households still did not have regular
access to electricity. This prolonged darkness, however, has clarified what
over a century of legal euphemisms have tried to obscure: that although US
citizenship was imposed on Puerto Ricans in 1917, living as nonvoting
citizens on a colonial possession that “belongs to, but is not part of” the
United States not only spells disaster.1 It can also spell death.
    While many Puerto Ricans have met this realization with a mixture of
outrage, resignation, and indifference to the United States, some Americans
have responded with a historically rare gesture: rhetorical incorporation. As
the hurricane approached, mainstream media outlets started to describe
Puerto Ricans as “3.4 million American citizens living in Puerto Rico.” Once
the storm devastated the island, the federal government failed to fully assist,
and President Trump disparaged Puerto Ricans, journalists and other public
figures started to entirely drop the distinction between citizen status and
national identity. Perhaps echoing Governor Ricardo Rosselló’s mournful
address to “my fellow Americans” on the eve of María’s landfall, they started
to simply call Puerto Ricans “Americans” and, even more unexpectedly, “our
fellow Americans.”
     One of the first outlets to do so was the Weather Channel, whose anchors
and reporters, especially Paul Goodloe, repeatedly declared that Puerto
Ricans are Americans. CBS correspondent David Begnaud, who emerged as
one of the most compelling and dedicated journalists of the immediate post-
María crisis, routinely did the same. In an October 5 report on island
conditions, for example, he stressed with exasperation, “These are Americans
sitting in line, sleeping in their cars, desperately trying to get fuel.”2
    MSNBC commentator Rachel Maddow was at times more emphatic.
Reporting on the infamous “spa day” story, in which a US doctor quit after
witnessing medical personnel turn a hospital triage center into a manicure
station, Maddow remarked in an alarmed tone: “You have people starting to
die, Americans starting to die, in Puerto Rico because of treatable bacterial
infections … This storm is no longer killing Americans—the federal
government’s response to the storm is now killing Americans.”3
    For a number of US journalists, continually calling Puerto Ricans
“American” was a way to keep audiences following the story and to maintain
the political pressure on the federal government. In an unusual case of
reflexivity and advocacy in a mainstream publication, reporters Kyle Dropp
and Brendan Nyhan of the New York Times even made the case that what
“three million Americans in Puerto Rico” were termed was a life-and-death
question and underscored the link between rhetoric and survival.4
Commenting on a poll about US perceptions of Puerto Ricans shortly after
the hurricane struck, they noted that Americans in general—including Trump
supporters—were more comfortable with the idea of providing aid to Puerto
Ricans once they knew that they were US citizens. The finding was reported
as both a conclusion and a plea: “Our sympathies for other people depend in
part on whether we see them as fellow members of our tribe. Without more
coverage, it may be easy to forget that the people suffering are our fellow
Americans.”5
    Journalists were not alone in embracing rhetorical incorporation as a
strategy. Corporate America also got in on the act. Perhaps the most striking
instance was a public service announcement produced by the megastore
Walmart, which began running on primetime television on October 9. Called
“United,” the PSA was not Walmart’s first on a hurricane-related theme. The
company had released another PSA a month earlier to raise funds for those
affected by Hurricane Harvey in Texas. The thirty-second Texas spot began
with a photograph of Houston partly underwater and ended with a written
message: “To the Lone Star State, you are not alone.” According to
adland.com, this message helped raise over $25 million.6
    The Puerto Rico English-language version was similar in form and
included references from American popular culture, suggesting that in the
eyes of Walmart the island was equal to any state. The video opened with
images of the hurricane’s impact under an instrumental arrangement of Ben
E. King’s classic “Stand by Me.” Although the lyrics are not part of the PSA,
the song was likely chosen to allude to the destruction of the power grid and
ensuing darkness: “When the night has come/And the land is dark/And the
moon is the only light we’ll see/No, I won’t be afraid/Oh, I won’t be
afraid/Just as long as you stand, stand by me.” In this rendition, a male voice-
over heard during the spot’s duration declares, “To our fellow Americans in
Puerto Rico, we may be separated by an ocean, but we are united.”7
    US politicians eventually joined in too. In an October 16, 2017, address to
the legislature after a visit to Puerto Rico, Florida Democratic senator Bill
Nelson repeated the phrases “our fellow Americans” or “fellow citizens” six
times, ending with “Our fellow Americans are dying, and they desperately
need our help…. I’m here to urge this Congress and the administration that
we have to act.”8 While Puerto Ricans in general, including elected public
officials, used the phrase significantly less often, New York Congress
member José Serrano also pressed his House colleagues the following week
in analogous terms: “[The people of Puerto Rico] are our fellow Americans;
they’ve served in our wars, they do pay taxes, and they should be treated
equally.”9
    The rhetorical explosion of “our fellow Americans” raises the question of
why this phrase emerged and why it arose with such force. Part of the answer
lies in how the term “American” remains a signifying site for struggles over
what and who Americans are (or can be), and who may claim full national
membership and access the benefits of US citizenship. Although Puerto
Ricans are mostly ignored in these debates, US journalists and political actors
have occasionally called attention to Puerto Rico’s colonial subjection
through the vocabulary of citizenship and national belonging. A portion of a
1900 Washington Times article quoted in the Congressional Record offers a
succinct example that feels thoroughly current in both content and rhetoric.
After the House of Representatives voted on legislation asserting that the
nation’s constitution did not apply in full to the island, the Times proclaimed,
“The crime against our suffering fellow-Americans in Puerto Rico, and
against the Constitution of the United States, is complete.”10
     Another part of the answer lies in the idiom’s relationship to presidential
rhetoric. The phrase stems from “my fellow-citizens,” in use since the
republic’s early period and employed by the nation’s first president, George
Washington. The present usage consolidated in the twentieth century through
its reiteration by various presidents, including Franklin D. Roosevelt, who in
1933 was the first to adopt it in an inaugural speech. The expression’s
contemporary resonance, however, can best be traced to Lyndon B. Johnson,
who integrated it into every State of the Union and other key speeches on
divisive subjects in which American lives were at stake. Among these were
Johnson’s last two addresses to the nation. On each occasion he began with
“Good evening, my fellow Americans,” before announcing that he would
first limit, then halt bombing in Vietnam, and not seek reelection.
     At a time when the president knowingly failed to safeguard US citizens,
the phrase’s association with presidential addresses and their effect of
rhetorically constituting the “American people” propelled its surge following
María. The repetition of “our fellow Americans” affirmed that Americans
themselves have the power to incorporate Puerto Rico as part of the national
body politic and dictate that Puerto Ricans deserve care as US citizens. In
other terms, to the extent that President Trump has explicitly claimed the
category of “American” for whites, “our fellow Americans” seeks to refuse
the president’s racist rhetoric by taking over presidential speech. The phrase
ultimately aims to be a declaration of democratic inclusion—the chosen
version is, after all, “our” and not “my” fellow Americans—and a form of
protest against the explicitly racist rhetoric of the nation’s head of
government.
     In retrospect, this strategy has had tangible effects. Brigades of nurses,
pilots, cooks, celebrities, and even the Simpsons’ cartoon bartender Moe have
sent money and supplies to Puerto Rico or donated their time. A Kaiser
Family Foundation poll found that a month after María hit, 62 percent of
Americans agreed that Puerto Ricans were not getting the help they
needed.11 More notably still, according to a Fox News poll, the percentage of
Americans who supported admitting Puerto Rico as a state of the union
jumped, from 30 percent in 2007 to 41 percent in 2017.12 If the numbers are
reliable, this is a remarkable outcome, since as a result of the expanded
coverage, it became widely known that the island is experiencing a massive
debt crisis hinging on $120 billion in bond and pension obligations, that it
will require billions of dollars to recover from the debt and hurricane
devastation, and that nearly half the population lives below the poverty line.
    At the same time, the deployment and embrace of “our fellow
Americans” is significantly more vexed than it appears. A good example is
Walmart’s PSA, mentioned above. While the company may have intended to
raise money for relief, many Puerto Ricans saw the ad as hypocritical given
the company’s impact on the island. Since 2000, Walmart has become Puerto
Rico’s largest private employer and its highest-grossing retailer, with
upwards of $2.75 billion in annual revenue and more stores per square mile
than anywhere else on earth.13 In the process of attaining market dominance,
Walmart has destroyed the vast majority of local competition, including
independent pharmacies, and has been a factor in over eight hundred small
business bankruptcies. Its near monopoly has likewise driven up
unemployment: for every new job that Walmart creates, the economy loses
an average 2.3 positions. Equally important, the types of jobs that Walmart
has generated are mostly part-time, minimum-wage ones, without benefits or
the right to organize. In this regard, Walmart’s apparent post-María largesse
masks its predatory relationship to Puerto Rico.
    But even for institutions, companies, or groups without Walmart’s
history, the rhetorical gesture of incorporation remains complicated.
Although recognizing Puerto Ricans as Americans may translate into greater
attention in some contexts, the strategy of “liberal generosity,” as philosopher
Nelson Maldonado-Torres termed it, is problematic for what it assumes,
conceals, and omits.14 Not only has the rhetoric failed to disrupt colonial
relations, it also reveals and entrenches colonialism in fundamental ways.
    For instance, those who insist that Puerto Ricans are “our fellow
Americans” seek to address Americans’ lack of knowledge about Puerto
Rico; according to one poll, only 54 percent of Americans were aware that
Puerto Ricans are legally US citizens in late 201715—one hundred years
after Congress passed the Jones-Shafroth Act that conferred US citizenship to
island residents. Yet, in attempting to convey that Puerto Ricans are US
citizens, commentary and coverage tended to obscure the coloniality of such
citizenship. In fact, the appeal’s relative success in generating empathy is
possible solely because the vast majority of Americans do not know (or care)
that Puerto Ricans are not equal citizens of the United States but territorial
citizens with limited rights. In this regard, “our fellow Americans” can only
be a viable media strategy if it veils that Puerto Rico is a colonial possession
and its citizens colonial subjects. As writer Eduardo Lalo put it, for Puerto
Ricans, “citizenship is a trap” that allows the United States to erase or avoid
acknowledging that its occupation of Puerto Rico is an act of colonialism.16
     Rhetorical incorporation also ignores the intimate ties between
colonialism and racism, and it sidesteps that citizenship has never offered full
protection for racialized, colonial, and otherwise minoritized legal citizens in
the United States. In this way, the rhetorical gesture reaffirms the myth that
once citizenship is acquired, all Americans experience it equally, which is not
historically nor currently the case. This is dramatically evident in recent
federal hurricane response: US citizenship did not protect African Americans
from dying during Katrina (2005) and has not kept Black and Latinx
communities stateside from being flooded with toxic waters, which will harm
“Americans” for generations, in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey (2017).
Neither the state nor citizenship status alone has ever guaranteed rights for
racialized people.
     The deployment of “our fellow Americans” likewise exposes how US
nationalist identification and subjection, rather than the acceptance of
colonial responsibility or a shared humanity, is presented as the only way to
generate support for Puerto Ricans. Maldonado-Torres has explicitly
critiqued the “American” appeal by pointing out that Puerto Ricans should
“receive help because they are people, not because they are [American]
citizens.”17 In this context, the trope reiterates US rhetorical sovereignty by
repositioning Americans, generally white Americans, as sources of authority
and “authenticators” of Puerto Rican humanity solely via their
acknowledgment of the group’s Americanness.18 US political actors presume
that this recognition is an intrinsic good and fail to consider that the majority
of Puerto Ricans may desire to be recognized otherwise.19 “Our fellow
Americans,” then, also erases Puerto Rican ethnic, national, and other
identities, as well as their long history of struggles against US colonialism.
    Yet perhaps the most critical aspect of the attempt to rhetorically make
Americans out of Puerto Ricans is its utter failure to end the suffering on the
ground. This outcome highlights that Puerto Rico’s colonial subjection is
thoroughly systemic, involving multiple politicial, legal, economic, and
discursive relations of power favoring US capital and elites. Despite the
rhetoric of inclusion, four weeks after the hurricane, no fewer than sixty-nine
House Republicans voted against additional aid for Puerto Rico.20 Usual
responses to disasters in the United States, such as expanding the food stamp
program for families in need, were not followed because, unlike in the fifty
states, there is a cap on the amount of funds the island can receive, even in
times of emergency, due to its territorial designation. For still-disputed
reasons, the mutual aid typically provided by states when catastrophe hits
also did not kick in. States like New Jersey, Virginia, and Massachusetts were
quick to send personnel, equipment, and other assistance to Texas and Florida
following Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and María, but not to Puerto Rico.
    Consistently, the quantity and quality of journalistic interest itself largely
continues to replicate existing colonial relations. After María there was a
spike in reporting about Puerto Rico, which was more extensive than
previous coverage of the island’s debt crisis. This expanded reporting,
however, has been considerably less than that accorded to hurricane damage
in Texas and Florida as María “received only a third as many mentions in text
as hurricanes Harvey and Irma.”21 The equally devastated US Virgin Islands
—where three-quarters of the population is Black and which has a relatively
small and unconcentrated diaspora—received nearly no coverage at all. As
noted by researchers Anushka Shah and Allan Ko, and journalist Fernando
Peinado, attention to Puerto Rico picked up only after Trump visited the
island and has faded since. In addition, whereas media coverage in the United
States focuses on the needs of residents and the hurricane’s impact on
families, Puerto Rico’s coverage is largely related to partisan politics, debt,
and taxes,22 underscoring that media interest is often motivated by anti-
Trump or anti-Republican sentiment rather than a commitment to resolving
urgent problems, ending US colonialism, or addressing climate change in the
region. Millions of people seem more outraged by Trump’s tossing paper
towels at Puerto Ricans than US colonial rule in Puerto Rico, the Virgin
Islands, and other US territories.
    In other words, the liberal appeal of “our fellow Americans” is no match
for a racist, colonial logic designed to keep resources away from racialized
“minorities” deemed undeserving. Trump personally underlined this logic
when he defended his administration’s negligent response by invoking
enduring stereotypes of Puerto Ricans as lazy, responsible for their own
financial woes, and unreasonable in their expectations of the US government.
In contrast to his September 1 speech on post-Harvey Texas, when he stated,
“We will support you today, tomorrow and the day after…. We help our
fellow Americans every single time,” Trump’s October 12 tweet to Puerto
Ricans claimed that “we can’t keep FEMA, the Military & First Responders
… in P.R. Forever.” Predictably, this assertion is inconsistent with FEMA’s
record; the agency sometimes stays engaged in disaster areas for more than a
decade after a storm.23 In fiscal year 2017 alone, FEMA was slated to
provide $440 million in relief to Gulf Coast states for damages resulting from
2005 hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma, and $1.4 billion to New York and
New Jersey for Sandy. A year since María, FEMA maintains a presence in
Puerto Rico, although its impact appears to be minimal.
    But even if the federal government were handling Puerto Rico’s crisis
like one in any other US state, the island would not be spared another,
similarly harsh “American” response: disaster capitalism. Well-connected
companies receive no-bid multimillion-dollar contracts to rebuild at an
exorbitant cost;24 recovery gives way to land grabs, privatization, and more
debt. Repeating what happened after Katrina to majority-Black New Orleans,
whose citizens had full congressional representation, the interests of most
Puerto Ricans are being sold out with impunity. Moreover, as befits colonial
governance, a provision of the Republican tax bill passed by Congress in
December 2017 took this profiteering to new heights. Though the final bill
didn’t include a threatened 20 percent excise tax on goods imported to the
mainland—which could have cut as much as one-third of the local
government’s revenues—a separate 12.5 percent tax on income from
intellectual property could gut Puerto Rican pharmaceutical manufacturing,
one of the largest and best-paid sectors of the island’s economy.25
   Ultimately, in this unnatural disaster made by the intersection of climate
change, modern colonialism, and Trumpism, it is evident why an appeal to
“our fellow Americans” has not saved Puerto Ricans. For too many,
including those who now control the nation’s resources, the phrase continues
to fundamentally refer to privileged whites. Neither legal nor rhetorical
incorporation undoes the fact that citizenship is a category that goes beyond
legal status, that relegates minoritized groups to an infra-citizenship, and that
confers only tenuous claims to American identity and the protections it
presumably offers. Paradoxically, the longer the US government deliberately
fails in Puerto Rico, the more fleeing Puerto Ricans will legally turn into full-
fledged US citizens, further unsettling Americanness.


1 Originally published as Frances Negrón-Muntaner, “Our Fellow Americans: Why
  Calling Puerto Ricans ‘Americans’ Will Not Save Them,” Dissent, January 10, 2018.
1. For a more extended exploration of the trope of darkness after María, see Frances
    Negrón-Muntaner, “Blackout: What Darkness Illuminated in Puerto Rico,”
    Politics/Letters, March 2, 2018, http://politicsslashletters.org/blackout-darkness-
    illuminated-puerto-rico/.
2. David Begnaud, “Puerto Rico Hurricane Damage,” CBS News, October 5, 2017,
    https://www.cbsnews.com/video/puerto-rico-hurricane-damage-david-begnaud/.
3. Rachel Maddow, “Doctor Quits Puerto Rico Medical Relief Team over ‘Spa Day,’”
    Rachel Maddow Show, October 12, 2017, http://www.msnbc.com/rachel-
    maddow/watch/doctor-quits-puerto-rico-medical-relief-team-over-spa-day-
    1072301123804.
4. Kyle Dropp and Brendan Nyhan, “Nearly Half of Americans Don’t Know Puerto
    Ricans Are Fellow Citizens,” New York Times, September 26, 2017,
    https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/26/upshot/nearly-half-of-americans-dont-know-
    people-in-puerto-ricoans-are-fellow-citizens.html.
5. Dropp and Nyhan, “Nearly Half of Americans.”
6. “Walmart ‘That’s Texas’ (2017):30 (USA),” posted by “kidsleepy,” September 2,
    2017, Adland.com, https://adland.tv/commercials/walmart-thats-texas-2017-30-usa.
7. “Walmart Puerto Rico Relief Fund: ‘United,’” October 9-31–2017,
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c9pBgB3dllo.
8. Bill Nelson, “‘Our Fellow Americans are Dying, and They Desperately Need Our
    Help,’”        Sunshine        State       News,        October        17,      2017,
    http://sunshinestatenews.com/story/bill-nelson-takes-senate-floor-speak-about-puerto-
    rico-our-fellow-americans-are-dying-and-they.
9. Bonnie Castillo, “‘As Puerto Rico Suffers, Where Is Our Government?’ Nurses Join
    Congress Members to Urge Action on Healthcare Crisis,” National Nurses United
    blog, October 27, 2017, https://www.nationalnursesunited.org/blog/puerto-rico-suffers-
    where-our-government-nurses-join-congress-members-urge-action-healthcare.
10. 56th Cong. Rec. H3378 (March 27, 1900).
11. Sandra Lilley, Suzanne Gamboa, Daniella Silva, and Carmen Sesin, “‘When Did We
    Stop Being America?’ Puerto Ricans Angry, Dismayed over Trump Tweets,” NBC
    News, October 12, 2017, https://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/puerto-rico-crisis/when-
    did-we-stop-being-america-puerto-ricans-dismayed-over-n810151.
12. “Fox News Poll: Support for Puerto Rican Statehood Increases in Wake of María,”
    Fox News, October 26, 2017, http://www.foxnews.com/politics/fox-news-poll-support-
    for-puerto-rican-statehood-increases-in-wake-maria.html.
13. Joel Cintrón Arbasetti, “Puerto Rico First in the World with Walgreens and Walmart
    per Square Mile,” Centro de Periodismo Investigativo, May 7, 2014,
    http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2014/05/puerto-rico-first-in-the-world-with-
    walgreens-and-walmart-per-square-mile/.
14. Nelson Maldonado-Torres, respondent remarks, “Aftershocks of Disaster: Puerto Rico
    a         Year         after        María,”        Rutgers        University,      n.d.,
    https://livestream.com/rutgersitv/aftershocks/videos/180935036.
15. Dropp and Nyhan, “Nearly Half of Americans.”
16. Eduardo Lalo, “Aftershocks of Disaster: Puerto Rico a Year after María,” Rutgers
    University, n.d., https://livestream.com/rutgersitv/aftershocks/videos/180935036.
17. Facebook post, September 27, 2017, and personal communication, December 28,
    2017.
18. For a discussion of the concept of “rhetorical sovereignty,” see Scott Richard Lyons,
    “Rhetorical Sovereignty: What Do American Indians Want from Writing?,” College
    Composition and Communication 51, no. 3 (February 2000): 447–68.
19. This is consistent with US media portrayals of Latinos more generally, portrayals that,
    as Félix Gutiérrez has written, seek “to cover or portray Latinos to a largely Anglo
    audience through mass entertainment and news media with images, issues, and stories
    that will appeal to and attract that audience.” They also tend to represent Latinos “as
    weaker or less engaged people needing the help of Anglos to make progress.” Félix F.
    Gutiérrez, “More Than 200 Years of Latino Media in the United States,” American
    Latino Theme Study, National Park Service, US Department of the Interior, n.d.,
    https://www.nps.gov/heritageinitiatives/latino/latinothemestudy/media.htm.
20. Cristina Marcos, “69 Republicans Vote against Aid for Puerto Rico, Other Disaster
    Sites,” The Hill, October 12, 2017, http://thehill.com/blogs/floor-action/house/355225-
    69-republicans-vote-against-puerto-rico-aid.
21. Anushka Shah, Allan Ko, and Fernando Peinado, “The Mainstream Media Didn’t Care
    about Puerto Rico until It Became a Trump Story,” Washington Post, November 27,
    2017,        https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/posteverything/wp/2017/11/27/the-
    mainstream-media-didnt-care-about-puertorico-until-it-became-a-trump-story/?
    utm_term=.8d5cd79ada7b.
22. Shah, Ko, and Peinado “The Mainstream Media Didn’t Care.”
23. Ryan Struyk, “FEMA Actually Can Stay in Puerto Rico Indefinitely,” CNN, October
    12, 2017, http://www.cnn.com/2017/10/12/politics/fema-trump-hurricane-puerto-
    rico/index.html.
24. Vann R. Newkirk II, “The Puerto Rico Power Scandal Expands,” Atlantic, November
    3, 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2017/11/puerto-rico-whitefish-
    cobra-fema-contracts/544892/.
25. Armando Valdés Prieto, “How the GOP Tax Bill Will Wreck What’s Left of Puerto
    Rico’s        Economy,”         Washington      Post,      December       20,     2017,
    https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/posteverything/wp/2017/12/20/how-the-gop-
    tax-bill-will-wreck-whats-left-of-puerto-ricos-economy/?utm_term=.360324ff7cab.
US MEDIA DEPICTIONS OF CLIMATE MIGRANTS

        The Recent Case of the Puerto Rican “Exodus”

                             Hilda Lloréns

   The Caribbean is not an idyll, not to its natives. They draw their
   working strength from it organically, like trees, like the sea almond or
   the spice laurel of the heights. Its peasantry and its fishermen are not
   there to be loved or even photographed; they are trees who sweat,
   and whose bark is filmed with salt, but every day on some island,
   rootless trees in suits are signing favourable tax breaks with
   entrepreneurs, poisoning the sea almond and the spice laurel of the
   mountains to their roots. A morning could come in which
   governments might ask what happened not merely to the forests and
   the bays but to a whole people.
                                                            —Derek Walcott1

In the first weeks after Hurricane María made landfall in Puerto Rico, the
media circulated images depicting a sea of Brown and Black bodies crowding
the Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport, the massive number of
expectant passengers overflowing out to the airport’s curb. The island’s
largest point of entry and departure was at a standstill because, like the
electric grid, telecommunications equipment, radar, and other navigational
aids had been destroyed by the category 4 storm. This privatized airport
underwent multimillion-dollar renovations in 2014 and did not sustain major
damage.2 And yet commercial aviation’s complete dependence on electricity,
computers, and telecommunications technology made it nearly impossible for
flights to land or take off in the first days after the hurricane.
    In the photographs and videos, the people at the airport look tired, their
faces registering a range of emotions from consternation and dejection to
outright despair. Some sat upright, but many were slumped in chairs. Others
were lying down, resting or fast asleep on the airport’s shiny concrete floor,
their luggage acting as makeshift chairs, beds, and pillows. Still others stood
in snaking lines, exhausted babies and toddlers carried by family members, as
elderly and frail-looking people in wheelchairs lined up in the departure
gates. “After Hurricane María, Airport Looks Like a Shelter,” read a
headline. “Puerto Rico’s Biggest Airport Becomes a Refugee Camp,” read
another.3 A JetBlue clerk told a reporter, “People prefer to wait here instead
of dying on the island.”4
     This airport-cum-shelter offered little physical respite or comfort to the
stranded passengers. Instead, it was miserably hot; temperatures inside its
walls reached 100 degrees Fahrenheit.5 The airport’s design, like most
“modern” buildings on the island, is constructed with steel, concrete, and
glass, making it entirely dependent on air-conditioning to cool its cavernous
rooms. But when the electricity that powers the massive cooling system fails,
ventilation halts. The airport’s fortress like design also makes it reliant on
artificial lighting. The twenty-one generators used to power the airport could
barely produce enough electricity for a few scattered lights and industrial
fans. To boot, these generators depended on a rapidly dwindling and
dangerously low fuel supply.6 Such concrete buildings can, for the most part,
withstand the harsh cyclonic conditions that periodically sweep through the
Caribbean’s “continent of islands,” but when the energy-hungry systems that
sustain them fail, they quickly turn into dark, dangerously hot heat traps.7
    It was reported that the people camped out at the airport were desperate to
escape the chaotic conditions wrought by the hurricane. One woman told a
reporter, “I just don’t feel safe here,” and by “here” she meant the place
beyond the airport.8 Another commented, “We are running for our life” and
“Once we got into the gate, I was finally able to calm down because I knew
we were leaving.”9 The airport, it seems, became a de facto place of refuge
from the catastrophe still unfolding throughout the island; perhaps people felt
strength in numbers, or an imagined closeness to alla fuera (out there), as
Puerto Ricans often refer to the continental United States, where life was
imagined as “safe,” “orderly,” and “normal.”
    The scenes at the airport, of “throngs” of Puerto Ricans at the ready to
board planes bound for the continental United States, became a focal point in
the news cycle, as well as in the greater construction of a biblically tinged
post-María narrative dubbed as “the Puerto Rican exodus.” Following the
biblical etymology of exodus, Puerto Ricans bound for the continental United
States were seeking “salvation” after experiencing the theophany brought
upon them in the form of a merciless hurricane that violently stripped them of
normality and, for some, the possibility of continuing to make a life on the
island. Underscoring the fleeting nature of time, and possibly of life itself, a
twenty-six-year-old man who said he was thinking about migrating told a
reporter in October 2017, “Nothing is telling us everything will be OK in one
or two years. We don’t have that time to waste.”10 In the same article a
medical doctor explained, “The easy way out will be to buy a ticket and head
out.” A fifty-eight-year-old woman who was standing in a long line to get ice
made an ominous prediction: “Everyone will leave—everyone.”11
    The airport opened on a limited schedule just two days after the
hurricane, slowly ramping up commercial flights in the weeks that followed.
The media reported that thousands of Puerto Ricans filled each airplane to
capacity with seemingly no end to the numbers of people departing daily.
This exodus had no messianic or charismatic leader at its helm. Rather, the
group’s organizing logic rested on the collective realization, represented in
the number of people leaving the island, that for them the present was
untenable. For many, journeying away from a devastated home or from the
wrecked island or from an unimaginable future in the homeland meant
stepping into an uncertain future in the continental United States.


            VISUALIZING THE “DISASTROUS TROPICS”

The images from the airport peddled several stereotypes about the disastrous
tropics. I use this term to index a racialized historical trope in the Western
canon, a history produced in the world’s “temperate” zone, casting tropical
nature, including its Indigenous (Brown) and African (Black) inhabitants, as
fecund, unrestrained, and unrelenting, capable of great ferocity.12 The
crowds at the airport stood as evidence of the fecundity of tropical people,
who often appear gathered in intergenerational groups. A key characteristic
of this trope is the number of babies and children present, easily cohabiting
with each other and with tropical nature, including vegetation and nonhuman
animals.
    Imagery from the disastrous tropics quintessentially depicts individuals,
groups, and crowds who look variously stunned, bewildered, dejected,
destitute, traumatized, unfit, ill, disabled, dying, or dead. To complete this
tableau, individuals or crowds must be surrounded or engulfed in any or all of
the following: dirt, dislodged earth, mud, debris, squalor, ruins, stifling heat,
mosquitoes, flies, dirty water, and the implicit stench of decomposing bodies,
either human or animal. To complement the picture of societal upheaval and
disarray, the visual and media narrative emphasizes the absence of order, of
policing and the state, the lack of goods and resources, and pleas for
humanitarian aid and relief—which is almost always followed by news of a
lengthy period of dystopian uncertainty and spotty reconstruction efforts,
mismanagement of aid, funds, and botched projects, all confirming the trope
of the ungovernability of tropical nature and its inhabitants.13
    This trope implies that because the tropics are so impetuous, their people
live by default at the edge of disaster. To be livable for “modern,” “evolved”
people, tropical nature must be tamed using human ingenuity and advanced
technology. For instance, electrification extends the day by lighting the dark
tropical nights; the air-conditioner makes bearable the stifling, worsening
heat of a changing climate; and air travel closes the gaps in distances,
allowing people to move quickly across the globe. In the Western
imagination technological advancements and innovations make the tropics
habitable; modern technologies like electrification, vaccination, and water
purification, to name a few examples, are all central in the racial matrix of
Western imperial power. Touted as helping citizens of the Global South join
global modernity and obtain progress, “neutrally” benevolent technological
innovation is so naturalized as to hide embedded beliefs about the North’s
superior scientific intelligence and the South’s inferiority.
    When disaster strikes, the lack of essential technologies becomes a matter
of life and death. In Puerto Rico, an American colony that depends much
more than its Caribbean neighbors on electricity generated from fossil fuels,
the lack of access to alternative energy sources, such as modular solar panels
to power hospital operating rooms or dialysis machines, for instance, led to
preventable deaths.14 Yet many of these very “advances,” such as
electrification and airplane travel, depend almost entirely on fossil fuels, and
they are among the top sources of greenhouse gasses, which have led to an
increasingly unbalanced nature that is now producing stronger, more violent
Atlantic hurricanes, such as María. Unjustly, island societies and low-lying
coastal areas in the Caribbean and Pacific are on the front lines of climate
change and will likely continue to experience its worsening effects and
consequences, even though these societies contribute only a tiny fraction of
all greenhouse gas emissions.15
    After Hurricane María, the media produced thousands of images of
Puerto Rico and its people confronting a destroyed island, leaving it, or living
in crowded hotel rooms in various US cities, and these images now join the
last century’s visual archive of catastrophe. This archive is swollen with
depictions of the disastrous tropics, and with the number of disasters rapidly
multiplying, it only promises to expand. From afar, depictions include
satellite imagery of geophysical hazards themselves, such as hurricanes,
volcanoes, earthquakes, tsunamis, wildfires, floods, droughts, avalanches,
and landslides, as well as close-up depictions of their on-the-ground
consequences for landscapes, nature, and people.


             PUERTO RICANS AS CLIMATE REFUGEES?

“Puerto Ricans Could Be Newest US Climate Refugees,” read a headline on a
September 28, 2017, article published in the authoritatively named Scientific
American magazine.16 “America’s Climate Refugees Have Been Abandoned
by Trump,” read another in Mother Jones magazine on October 17, 2017. On
December 3, 2017, the Morningside Center for Teaching Social
Responsibility filed, under “Current Issues,” a lesson for children titled
“Cultivating Compassion for Puerto Rico’s ‘Climate Refugees.’”17 An
article published on February 19, 2018, in Yes! magazine was titled “Climate
Refugees in Florida Could Change the Politics There for Generations.”18 On
May 7, 2018, Teen Vogue published a poignant firsthand account titled
“Hurricane María Made Me a Climate Change Refugee.”19 These headlines
are integral to the greater ideological construction classifying Puerto Rican
migrants post-María as climate refugees in the zeitgeist.
    These claims open the field to various inquiries: Who are climate
refugees? What makes a population qualify as such? What conventions guide
such a definition? And what does the application of this label mean for the
labeled population? In the 1970s the term environmental refugee emerged to
describe people who were forced to migrate as a result of environmental
deterioration or catastrophic conditions in their homelands.20 In 1985 a
formal definition of environmental refugee entered the public discourse when
Essam El-Hinnawi, working with the UN Environment Programme, defined
them as “those people who have been forced to leave their traditional habitat,
temporarily or permanently, because of marked environmental disruption
(natural or triggered by people) that jeopardized their existence and/or
seriously affected the quality of their life [emphasis added].”21
    The notion of traditional habitat is problematic for at least two reasons.
When used to refer to islands, it glosses over the fact that migration to and
from islands has historically followed the ebb and flow of natural climatic
hazards. In the case of Puerto Rico’s history since the European conquest,
migration has been closely tied to economic conditions. Movement of
populations in and out of islands has been part and parcel of Caribbean
habitation since prehistoric times.22 Perhaps it is time to revisit the idea that
people born on islands, such as Puerto Rico, are meant to remain there for the
duration of their lives. Conceptualizing Indigenous and Black populations
from the Global South as people who “naturally” belong to their ecosystem,
like plant species, frames their mobility and migration as a pathological
condition of uprootedness, contrasted with wealthy cosmopolitan Westerners
who are highly mobile, global citizens.23 Though there is no clear difference
between the terms environmental and climate refugee, it appears as if
environmental refugee morphed into climate refugee as a way to more
directly index the role climate change plays in causing population
displacement and migration.24
    Thus, the media narrative classifying Puerto Ricans as climate refugees
ignores two important issues. First, the 1951 Refugee Convention does not
recognize “environmental” or “climate” refugees. These categories of
displaced people as deserving protection emerged later.25 Under the 1951
Convention, refugees are defined only as those who fear being persecuted
“on the grounds related to race, religion, nationality or membership of a
particular social group or political opinion, and are unable or unwilling, for
fear of persecution, to seek protection from their home countries.”26 Second,
because Puerto Ricans are US citizens, they are not considered refugees since
they did not cross international borders. Instead, according to the 1998 UN
Guiding Principle of Internal Displacement, they are “internally displaced
persons” (IDPs). Because the storm and its disastrous consequences are
understood to produce short-duration hardships, Puerto Ricans do not face
any of the three impediments—legal, factual, or humanitarian—for returning
to their homeland, as defined in a 2012 UN report.27
    Although the scholarship on Puerto Rican migration is plentiful, it has not
sufficiently emphasized that Puerto Ricans have long been economic and
climate migrants to the continental United States. In the twentieth century,
increasing modernization and eventual industrialization led to the total
collapse of agro-industrial jobs on the island. In turn, thousands of
individuals and families migrated north. On the island, the feminized
industrial sector was never enough to lower the ranks of the unemployed, and
chronic joblessness among working-age men and women coupled with
episodic hurricanes and droughts also contributed to people’s decision to
migrate. Moreover, episodic emigration and return have been a characteristic
livelihood adaptation for many Puerto Ricans.28 In the twenty-first century,
the island’s debt crisis and ensuing austerity policies and politics, coupled
with intensifying climatic hazards, contamination, and pollution, have led
more people to leave the island.
    The media’s construction of Puerto Ricans as climate refugees served
several ends. It underscored the catastrophic nature of the hurricane, as well
as its traumatic consequences. It is widely believed that the conditions
leading to refugee status always produce trauma in the individuals or groups
who experience it.29 The popular images and cultural characterizations of
Puerto Rican climate refugees made them a “target population” whose
“behavior and well-being” would be closely examined by the public as well
as by policy makers. “Target population” narratives and visual
characterizations are evaluative, thereby allowing for the public at large and,
more significantly, policy makers to make assertions about a group’s
deservingness.30 What is useful about the target population framework is that
it helps explain how the needs of populations are co-constructed. The media
constructions that use this framework are often built on preexisting racial,
classed, and gendered assessments. They thus re-inscribe some groups as
more advantaged than others, and more importantly, the policies they endorse
often reinforce long-standing beliefs about the specific population at the
center of public discourse. In the case of post-María Puerto Ricans,
victimizing tropes such as helplessness and dependency (i.e., culture of
poverty) reemerged in the cultural and political arenas.
    The construction of Puerto Ricans as climate refugees has thrust them
into the center of the discourse on climate change crisis. This has had several
effects on the population itself as its plight is used as evidence of the climate
crisis, positioning them as victims mired in inequitable power relations.31 In
terms of the design of public policies, the historically negative evaluation of
Puerto Ricans as dependent on the state has also constructed them as burdens
on the state. The recent depiction of the “Puerto Rican exodus,” as arriving to
inflict an even greater burden on the state’s social services, has served to
promote racist fears in stateside locations where Puerto Ricans have sought
refuge. Certainly, an “exodus” of Puerto Rican climate refugees draws on
negative, racialized cultural referents of refugees as impoverished, needy, and
destitute. Additionally, the current US political climate, in which moral
panics have been stoked about security at the southern border, has
increasingly conflated and strengthened racist associations between
“refugees” and the dangers to American society supposedly posed by “illegal
immigrants.”
    In the case of post-María Puerto Rican climate migrants, the negative
valuation of their needs has been exemplified in FEMA’s abrupt ending of
the Transitional Sheltering Assistance program, which offers lodging
assistance to people who lost their homes. Though the initial response to the
crisis appeared robust in “friendly states” (such as Connecticut, for instance),
within a short span of time the humanitarian impulse had diminished, and
many climate migrants were left to their fate.32 In cities such as Orlando,
Florida, which has in the last two decades turned into a Puerto Rican ethnic
enclave and is in the throes of a housing shortage, climate migrants have been
unable to find affordable housing. Speaking from Orlando a year after
Hurricane María, seventy-year-old Benjamin Muñoz explained, “We have
come here and have been treated badly, they think we are bad people.
Sometimes I say, ‘do we have something contagious?’ We have been abused
we have suffered discrimination…. It bothers me when I hear that the crisis
has been solved, that we have been given apartments, there is a large group of
people who still don’t have any place to live.”33
    Clearly, the suffering that began with Hurricane María’s landfall in
Puerto Rico has continued to reverberate across space and time; the storm
itself marks only the beginning of the crucible experienced by those
individuals displaced by climate. The increasing ferocity of climate change is
only expected to increase the suffering of individuals around the world. If the
goal is to prevent death and suffering, governments must implement policies
to ameliorate the social factors, such as inequality and careless development,
that turn a climate hazard into an actual disaster. Though Puerto Rico and
Puerto Ricans have long been imaged within the visual regime of the
disastrous tropics, these latest depictions thrust them into a historically
unacknowledged or, for some, seemingly impossible category: the Puerto
Rican “climate refugee.” This is a category of migrants that is on the rise
worldwide, and while the case of Puerto Rico and its people is exemplary, it
is hardly exceptional.34 This means the next debt crisis or environmental
disaster may well affect vulnerable communities near you.
1. Derek Walcott, “The Antilles: Fragment of Epic Memory,” Nobel Lecture, December
    7, 1992, https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/literature/1992/walcott/lecture/.
2. Danica Coto, “Puerto Rico OKs Airport Privatization amid Protests,” USA Today,
    March 3, 2013, https://www.usatoday.com/story/todayinthesky/2013/03/01/puerto-
    rico-airport-privatization-deal-lifts-off/1956407/; John Kosman, “Canada Just Bought
    Half of Puerto Rico’s Main Airport,” New York Post, March 22, 2017,
    https://nypost.com/2017/03/22/canada-just-bought-half-of-puerto-ricos-main-airport/;
    Danica Coto, “Puerto Rico Airport to Unveil 200M in Upgrades,” USA Today, July 2,
    2014,      https://www.usatoday.com/story/todayinthesky/2014/07/02/puerto-ricos-san-
    juan-airport-to-unveil-200m-renovations/11943569/.
3. David Begnaud, “After Hurricane María, Puerto Rico Airport Looks Like a Shelter,”
    CBS This Morning, September 25, 2017, https://www.youtube.com/watch?
    v=dBqoNpOkqXE; Pablo Venes, “Puerto Rico’s Biggest Airport Becomes a Refugee
    Camp,” Daily Beast, September 27, 2017, https://www.thedailybeast.com/puerto-ricos-
    biggest-airport-becomes-a-refugee-camp.
4. Venes, “Puerto Rico’s Biggest Airport.”
5. Patrick Gillespie, “‘I Don’t Feel Safe Here’: A Night of Desperation in San Juan’s
    Sweltering         Airport,”        CNNMoney,          September         27,     2017,
    https://money.cnn.com/2017/09/27/news/puerto-rico-san-juan-airport/index.html.
6. Venes, “Puerto Rico’s Biggest Airport.”
7. David Koenig and Danica Coto, “Puerto Rico, with Almost No Electricity, Endures
    Stifling       Heat,”        Seattle        Times,      September        25,     2017,
    https://www.seattletimes.com/business/puerto-rico-is-in-the-dark-in-wake-of-
    hurricane-maria/.
8. Gillespie, “‘I Don’t Feel Safe Here.’”
9. Richard Fausset and Alan Blinder, “At Puerto Rico’s Main Airport, Heavy Hearts and
    Long       Waits,”       New         York      Times,     September       26,    2017,
    https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/26/us/puerto-rico-airport-maria.html.
10. Oren Dorell, “Who Will Rebuild Puerto Rico as Young Professionals Leave Island
    after     Hurricane       María?,”       USA       Today,     October      12,   2017,
    https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2017/10/12/puerto-rico-young-
    professionals-leaving-hurricane-Maria/754753001/.
11. Jack Healy and Luis Ferré-Sadurní, “For Many on Puerto Rico, the Most Coveted Item
    Is a Plane Ticket Out,” New York Times, October 5, 2017,
    https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/05/us/puerto-rico-exodus-Maria-florida.html. See
    also Frances Negrón-Muntaner, “The Emptying Island: Puerto Rican Expulsion in
    Post-María           Time,”           E-misférica,        no.         14       (2018):
    http://beta.hemisphericinstitute.org/en/emisferica-14-1-expulsion/14-1-essays/the-
    emptying-island-puerto-rican-expulsion-in-post-Maria-time.html/
12. Hilda Lloréns, Imaging the Great Puerto Rican Family: Framing Nation, Race and
    Gender during the American Century (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2014). See also
    Allan Sekula, “The Body and the Archive,” October 39 (1986): 3–64; Walcott, “The
    Antilles,” Nobel Lecture; Sylvia Wynter, “Unsettling the Coloniality of
    Being/Power/Truth/Freedom: Towards the Human, after Man, Its Overrepresentation
    —an Argument,” CR: The New Centennial Review 3, no.3 (2003): 257–337.
13. Hilda Lloréns, “Imaging Disaster: Puerto Rico through the Eye of Hurricane María,”
    Transforming Anthropology 26, no. 2 (2018): 136–56.
14. Lloréns, “Imaging Disaster,” Transforming Anthropology, 136–56; Luis Ferré-
    Sadurní, Frances Robles, and Lizette Alvarez, “‘This Is Like a War’: A Scramble to
    Care for Puerto Rico’s Sick and Injured,” New York Times, September 26, 2017,
    https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/26/us/puerto-rico-hurricane-healthcare-
    hospitals.html; Amy Aubert, “Fear after María as Dialysis Patients in Puerto Rico in
    ‘Desperate Need’ of Help,” ABC7, September 29, 2017, https://wjla.com/news/nation-
    world/fear-after-maria-as-dialysis-patients-puerto-rico-in-desperate-need-of-help.
15. Union of Concerned Scientists, “Each Country’s Share of CO2 Emissions,” October
    11, 2018, https://www.ucsusa.org/global-warming/science-and-impacts/science/each-
    countrys-share-of-co2.html.
16. Daniel Cusick and Adam Aton, “Puerto Ricans Could Be Newest US Climate
    Refugees,”          Scientific      American,         September         28,        2017,
    https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/puerto-ricans-could-be-newest-u-s-climate-
    refugees/.
17. Maireke van Woerkom, “Cultivating Compassion for Puerto Rico’s ‘Climate
    Refugees,’” Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility, December 3,
    2017,         https://www.morningsidecenter.org/teachable-moment/lessons/cultivating-
    compassion-puerto-ricos-climate-refugees.
18. Adam Lynch, “Climate Refugees in Florida Could Change the Politics There for
    Generations,” Yes!, February 19, 2018, https://www.yesmagazine.org/planet/climate-
    refugees-in-florida-could-change-the-politics-there-for-generations-20180219.
19. Agnes M. Torres Rivera, “Hurricane María Made Me a Climate Change Refugee,”
    Teen Vogue, May 7, 2018, https://www.teenvogue.com/story/hurricane-Maria-made-
    me-a-climate-change-refugee.
20. Norman Myers, Environmental Exodus: An Emergent Crisis in the Global Arena
    (Washington, DC: Climate Institute, 1995); Norman Myers, “Environmental Refugees:
    A Growing Phenomenon of the Twenty-First Century,” Philosophical Transactions B
    357, no. 1420 (2002): 609–13.
21. Joanna Apap, “The Concept of ‘Climate Refugee’: Toward a Possible Definition,”
    European         Parliamentary      Research       Service,     June      19,      2018,
    http://www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/document.html?reference=EPRS_BRI.
22. William F. Keegan and Corine L. Hofman, The Caribbean before Columbus (New
    York: Oxford University Press, 2017); Irving Rouse, The Tainos: The Rise and Decline
    of the People Who Greeted Columbus (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992).
23. Liisa Malkki, “National Geographic: The Rooting of Peoples and the Territorialization
    of National Identity among Scholars and Refugees,” Cultural Anthropology 7, no. 1
    (1992): 24–44; Cecilia Tacoli, “Crisis or Adaptation? Migration and Climate Change in
    a Context of High Mobility,” Environment and Urbanization 21 (2009): 513–25.
24. Apap, “Concept of ‘Climate Refugee.’”
25. Carol Farbotko and Heather Lazrus, “The First Climate Refugees? Contesting Global
    Narratives of Climate Change in Tuvalu,” Global Environmental Change 22 (2012):
    382–90.
26. Apap, “Concept of ‘Climate Refugee.’” It is striking—though not surprising, given the
    history of European colonialism and imperialism—that the 1951 convention altogether
    dismisses the central roles played by land, water, their territorial ownership, and their
    habitability (i.e., whether a place is suitable for people to make good lives) in
    originating many of the so-called political, rather than environmental, conflicts that
    give rise to refugee crises in the first place.
27. Walter Kälim and Nina Schrepfer, Protecting People Crossing Borders in the Context
    of Climate Change (Geneva: Division of International Protection, United Nations High
    Commissioner for Refugees, 2012), https://www.unhcr.org/4f33f1729.pdf.
28. David Griffith and Manuel Valdés-Pizzini, Fishers at Work, Workers at Sea: A Puerto
    Rican Journey through Labor and Refuge (Philadelphia: Temple University Press,
    2002); Jorge Duany, The Puerto Rican Nation on the Move: Identities on the Island
    and in the United States (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002).
29. Art Hansen and Anthony Oliver-Smith, Involuntary Migration and Resettlement: The
    Problems of Response and Dislocated People (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1982); Malkki,
    “National Geographic,” 24–44; Dermont Ryan, Barbara Dooley, and Ciarán Benson,
    “Theoretical Perspectives on Post-Migration and Well-Being among Refugees:
    Towards a Resource-Based Model,” Journal of Refugee Studies 21, no. 1 (2008): 1–18;
    Anthony Oliver-Smith, “Climate Change and Population Displacement: Disasters and
    Diasporas in the Twenty-First Century,” in Anthropology of Climate Change: From
    Encounters to Actions, ed. Susan A. Crate and Mark Nuttall (Walnut Creek, CA: Left
    Coast, 2009), 116–38; Celia McMichael, Jon Barnett, and Anthony J. Michael, “An Ill
    Wind? Climate Change, Migration and Change,” Environmental Health Perspectives,
    120, no. 5 (2012): 646–654. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104375.
30. Anne Schneider and Helen Ingram, “Social Construction of Target Populations:
    Implications for Politics and Policy,” American Political Science Review 87, no. 2
    (1993): 334.
31. Carol Farbotko and Heather Lazrus, “The First Climate Refugees? Contesting Global
    Narratives of Climate Change in Tuvalu,” Global Environmental Change 22 (2012):
    382–90; Michael T. Bravo, “Voices from the Sea Ice: The Reception of Climate
    Impact Narratives,” Journal of Historical Geography 35 (2009): 256–78; Geraldine
    Terry, “No Climate Justice without Gender Justice: An Overview of the Issues,”
    Gender and Development 17, no. 1 (2009): 5–18.
32. Frances Robles, “Government Can Stop Paying to House Puerto Rico Hurricane
    Victims,     Judge     Rules,”    New      York     Times,    August   30,     2018,
    https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/30/us/puerto-rico-fema-housing.html; Sarah Ruiz-
    Grossman, “Displaced Puerto Ricans Face Dire Situations as FEMA Housing Aid
    Nears       Its       End,”       August        24,       2018,      Huff       Post,
    https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/fema-housing-aid-hotels-puerto-rico-hurricane-
    maria-survivors_us_5b7f2608e4b0729515115850.
33. Kate Santich and Carlos Vásquez Otero, “Puerto Rican Evacuees in Central Florida
    Seek Stability in a New Life 1 Year After María,” Orlando Sentinel, September 21,
    2018,        https://www.orlandosentinel.com/news/puerto-rico-hurricane-recovery/os-
    hurricane-maria-one-year-later-central-florida-20180921-story.html.
34. Yarimar Bonilla, Non-sovereign Futures: French Caribbean Politics in the Wake of
    Disenchantment (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015); Aarón Gamaliel-
    Ramos, Islas migajas: Los países no dependientes del Caribe contemporáneo (San
    Juan: Travesier and Leduc, 2016).
    ACCOUNTABILITY AND REPRESENTATION

            Photographic Coverage after the Disaster

                          Erika P. Rodríguez

When Hurricane María hit that Wednesday morning, what was to come in the
following days, months, and year was unimaginable. It was my first storm
season working as a photographer, and I was to learn as things unfolded. Like
others in Puerto Rico, I suffered damages to my home. I worried about my
family and wondered where I was going to find food. I stood in long lines for
gas and cash, was eaten alive by mosquitoes every night, and lived in the
darkness of the power outage. There was no way to photograph it from a
distance, merely as an observer, because I was part of it. This was also my
story.
    Since 2012, I have been documenting my homeland with what began as a
personal project and has developed into my largest body of work. “The
Oldest Colony” is a meditation on Puerto Rican identity through the
framework of our colonial relationship with the United States. I started
photographing as a process to understand my own identity and experience as
a Puerto Rican. It began as a personal matter when I took the camera with me
and photographed my family, my friends, and the places that were quotidian
for me, but it later grew into a documentation of festivals, political events,
protests, and daily life, as well as assignment work. In the pictures, I am
always in search of that underlying layer of mild tension that expresses the
political limbo and identity crisis we exist in.
    Our collective memory is fragmented, which is something that I dwell on
and that influences my creative process. Photography has been a means to fill
in the gaps of my fractured knowledge and education about Puerto Rico and
its history. By creating a visual language and representation of our times, I
want to leave a body of work that in fifty or one hundred years can give a
glimpse of our reality, culture, joys, and hardships. I often ask myself, “How
are we going to look back at this time, and what are the images that are going
to represent what we’re living through right now?”
    Ours is a story of resilience, given that we carry over five hundred years
of colonization. Puerto Rico’s political condition as an unincorporated
territory of the United States, of existing under the discretion of Congress, of
not being a country—of remaining a colony—has denied us the right of self-
determination, autonomy, and sovereignty. “The Oldest Colony” is not just
something I talk about, it’s something I live. It’s that struggle and that
constant internal search to define who we are and, in the process, who I am.
    After covering the damage left by Hurricane Irma in the Virgin Islands
for the New York Times, a new storm was announced. On a regular Sunday
morning, I was sitting at a café in Santurce when the news alert came in: a
category 1 storm was expected to strengthen and hit the island directly. We
had two days to prepare. On September 20, 2017, Hurricane María became
the worst natural disaster to strike Puerto Rico in modern times. The storm
knocked out power and communications, closed schools and hospitals, and
created a mass exodus. It took a while to understand the depths of the
disaster. When arriving to a community in the first weeks and months after
the storm, I was often asked if I was an officer from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA). People desperately needed help. People often
said, “Ustedes son los primeros que llegan aquí” (You’re the first ones to get
here). All I had was my camera.
    As many as 2,975 residents died as a result of the storm, according to a
report by George Washington University. The official death toll is derived
from the estimate, but no actual numbers are expected to be determined. Until
everyone has a roof over their heads and until all the dead have been named,
no recovery can be declared.
    Our political limbo permeates everyday life. We have a rich culture, but
we don’t know who we are as a nation, or nonnation. Throughout history the
images that represent the commonwealth have been too often filled with
stereotypes that minimize and hinder our interactions.
    Helpless people. Unfit. Unable. Welfare Island. Paradise. Entertainment.
Escape. Coconuts and piña coladas. The place Americans can travel to
without a passport.
    Through the subtlety of daily life, the chaos of politics, the hardship of
the economic crisis, and the hurricane’s recovery our narrative emerges—
with its celebrations and contradictions. There were images I didn’t make in
the coverage of María. In the aftermath, I felt the responsibility to create
images that represented people with dignity, beyond the loudness of the
disaster. It was not about bending the truth or hiding it, but about
understanding a situation and deciding what is the most responsible way to
document people when they are most vulnerable.
    Photojournalists are there to capture things as they are happening, but we
have a responsibility to respectfully represent the communities that are
allowing us to be there with our cameras, especially in situations of pain and
trauma. There is a fine line between documentation and exploitation. I tend to
think before pressing the shutter. I work slowly. I try to avoid reproducing an
image of helplessness, a “look at the poor brown people in the Caribbean,
let’s go help them and bring them everything—because they don’t know how
and can’t help themselves.” The people in my photographs exist in my
common spaces; they are people I might see again. It’s my neighbor, it’s the
person putting gas in the pump next to me, it’s the person in front of the line
at the supermarket, in a festival, at a friend’s house. There’s a different
relationship when you work in a place where you’re accountable for how you
represent it.
    After the hurricane many birthdays on the island were celebrated in
communities without electricity, drinkable water, or access to fresh food. In
December, Christmas came as thousands remained in the dark or in shelters.
It might have felt as if there were not a lot of reasons to celebrate, but
fighting for our right to feel joy became for us not only a thing to do but also
a survival technique. A means of saying we are here, we are struggling, we
are together—we are not in our best conditions, but we are unified—and our
strength, our reasons to be alive, are taking place right now, right here, in
these celebrations.
    The perseverance and courage of those who remain, even as they struggle
to rebuild and continue their lives, is where light leaks through. It is in
quotidian spaces, in the most simple acts of organizing, of solidarity and
building community, that resilience lives.
Puerto Rico governor Ricardo Rosselló onstage with his family and other politicians from
his New Progressive Party, celebrating the birth of José Celso Barbosa in Bayamón, Puerto
Rico, on August 7, 2016. Barbosa is considered the father of the island’s pro-statehood
ideology.
A young couple listens to a speaker during a march for Puerto Rican independence in Hato
Rey, San Juan, Puerto Rico, on June 11, 2017. The American territory held its fifth
nonbinding referendum to choose what political relationship it wants with the United
States. Amid the island’s fiscal crisis, the event cost the local government $7 million.
Veteran Miguel Quiñones poses for a portrait in his home at Barrio Bubao in Utuado, on
October 25, 2017.
Police officers walk through a cloud of tear gas in Hato Rey, San Juan, Puerto Rico, during
the National Strike on May 1, 2018. For International Workers Day, people took to the
streets in protest of the austerity measures implemented by the Fiscal Control Board and
the local government.
Moráima Fuster serves ice cream to a customer at Heladería Lares, in front of Revolution
Square in Lares, Puerto Rico, on June 5, 2017. The ice cream store is popular for its more
than sixty unique flavors, including avocado and rice and beans.
Fourth grader Camila solves a problem during math class at the Hiram González
Elementary School in Bayamón, Puerto Rico, on May 9, 2017. The public school admitted
almost 200 more students from a neighboring elementary school that was closed as part of
a consolidation plan by Puerto Rico’s Department of Education.
People say goodbye to a loved one at the Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport in
Carolina, Puerto Rico, on January 21, 2018. After Hurricane María ravaged the island on
September 20, 2017, over one hundred thousand people are estimated to have left the island
for the continental United States.
Eliezer Román cuts the weeds on a hillside for a new coffee crop at Hacienda Lealtad in
Lares, Puerto Rico, on June 5, 2017. The owner of the plantation, Edwin Soto, has had to
diversify his business to counter the losses in coffee production. Recently he opened a
coffee shop and plans to open a hotel in the colonial-era estate of the Hacienda Lealtad.
An abandoned building that collapsed from the hurricane in Puerta de Tierra, San Juan,
Puerto Rico, on September 21, 2017.
An aisle for frozen goods remains closed as the power generator of Ralph’s Food
Warehouse in Humacao, Puerto Rico, is not powerful enough to keep the freezers running,
on October 23, 2017. A month after Hurricane María ravaged the island, food distribution
was still unstable, leaving many shelves empty and bottled water scarce.
Jeremy Arce, 22, cleans parts of the ceiling that fell at the coffin showroom in Funeraría J.
Oliver in Ponce, Puerto Rico, on November 8, 2017. The coffins have been covered in
plastic to protect them from roof leaks. The funeral home said their services had tripled
since Hurricane Maria devastated the island over a month earlier.
People look at the destruction left by Hurricane María hours after the storm passed the
island on September 20, 2017, in Guaynabo, Puerto Rico. The storm landed with sustained
winds of 155 miles per hour.
A woman poses for a portrait in her home in San Juan, Puerto Rico, on August 4, 2018.
Almost eleven months after the storm destroyed her home, and affected many in her
community, she still lived under plastic tarps.
According to the company, people rest as they wait in line throughout the night for the
opportunity to purchase no more than two bags at Tropical Ice in Ponce, Puerto Rico, on
September 28, 2017. Puerto Rico’s power utility took eleven months to restore power to the
entire island.
Julia Guzmán Serrano, 65, hangs a solar lamp in her living room on May 22, 2018, in
Utuado, Puerto Rico. Eight months after the storm, her home remained without power. Her
67-year-old husband, William Reyes Torres, suffers from sleep apnea and could not power
his breathing machine during the night. “I pray every night to wake up the next morning,”
said Reyes.
Carlos Torres draws in the darkness of the power outage while he spends time with
neighbors outside at San Isidro community in Canóvanas, Puerto Rico, twelve days after
Hurricane María on October 2, 2017.
From left: Lorraine Martínez, Tamary Díaz, Deliris Ortiz, and Keren Acevedo sing under a
cell phone light during a parranda at the house of a coworker who still had no power in
Guaynabo, Puerto Rico, on December 16, 2017. About half the island spent the holidays in
the dark that year.
Leo Garay Bernal, 3, shows his tennis shoes to Waleska Semiday, as he looks for shoes his
size at the impromptu memorial for people who died in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria
on June 1, 2018, in San Juan, Puerto Rico. The event, called Project 4,645, was a collective
initiative organized on social media as a reaction to the study by Harvard’s T. H. Chan
School of Public Health published earlier that week in the New England Journal of
Medicine. The study estimated that 4,645 people died as a result of Hurricane María and its
aftermath, in contrast to the government’s official number, which remained at sixty-four
direct deaths. By nighttime there were over eight hundred shoes, some of which had stories
or names attached to them.
                        LIFTING THE VEIL

       Portraiture as a Tool for Bilateral Representation

                         Christopher Gregory

The idea that Hurricane María lifted a “veil” covering Puerto Rican realities
was repeated in both local and international media. Perhaps the key driver of
this conceptualization in the wake of the hurricane was the images circulating
in outlets and social media. The role of the image in understanding the
aftermath of disaster is undeniable in any situation, especially in the
increasingly mediated modern world. But in Puerto Rico, something different
happened. By lifting a veil, the images seemingly changed the way Puerto
Ricans understood themselves; it revealed a truth that was somehow always
there but unseen.
    Behind the so-called veil was an island plagued with widespread poverty
and decrepit infrastructure. But this reality had always been faced by a large
part of the population on the island. For them the lifting of the veil revealed
not their own poverty but the other side of the gaze: an “affluent” metropolis
unwilling to accept the reality of failed industrialization.
    My work and its methodology aim to disrupt this narrative of industrial
morality. While the rural communities in many instances have, in fact, had
many disadvantages, their material or circumstantial loss, in my opinion,
should not be the main focus of documentation. In addition to the physical
destruction, the psychological space inhabited by the residents of Puerto Rico
was crucial to represent and understand. This psychological space is not only
a result of the death and destruction caused by the hurricane but also the
political reality revealed by the hurricane—a colonial power that has
abandoned its subjects.
    To avoid a post-Fordist gaze in my own documentation, I opted to use
portraiture in addition to traditional vérité reportage. Portraiture in this
context provides a collaborative representation of the subject. It exploits the
evidentiary nature of photography to provide a document that is a dialogue,
not a “capture.” My methodology involved spending a long time with my
subjects before photographing them, not only to understand their perspective
on their situation but also to develop a relationship of trust for a meaningful
exchange during the sitting.
    Although the hurricane was a “news” event, I view the documentarian’s
role as one that must take into consideration the long historical context of the
people and place at hand to get at the underlying systems that created the
situation being documented. In the case of the storm, it is a colonial
relationship that extends beyond present-day fiscal austerity and political
aspirations. It includes imperial violence that has left hundreds of thousands
of people across the Americas to fend for themselves.
    My portraits, especially of rural communities, aim to connect the reader
with their physical and psychological state but also to this historic reality that
extends beyond the storm. For many rural communities, the abandonment
came as no surprise. Before the storm, they were often isolated from even
their own local government in the challenging terrain of the Cordillera
Central.
    With this body of work, it is my intention to illustrate this particular
abandonment while exalting the radical and resilient independence that these
communities have developed as a result of this violence. It is a spirit that
transcends the political reality of colonialism and is ill-served by the
imposition of a post-Fordist gaze.
The principal road of Punta Santiago in Humacao, Puerto Rico. Humacao was one of the
municipalities on the southeast of the island where the eye of the storm made landfall and
one of the last to have electricity restored.
A damaged home in Aibonito, a town in Puerto Rico’s mountainous central region.
Javier Cabrera sifts through scraps at a makeshift junkyard set up in Aibonito after the
hurricane. “I can’t leave everything to the government,” he said while looking inside
discarded televisions for electronic parts, which he used to fix electrical generators.
In Punta Santiago, Humacao, a community organization hands out three bags of ice to
residents. Many used it to keep food and medical supplies from spoiling during the long
months without electricity.
Members of the National Guard talk to a boy in the Guavate neighborhood of Cayey. They
offered him a chance to get in the driver’s seat of a convoy vehicle. The guard as well as
FEMA and the army have been criticized for inefficiently distributing meals and aid to the
island.
A chainsaw and machete used by utility repair workers in Utuado, Puerto Rico.
Javier Jose Capó Alicea’s home in Yabucoa, Puerto Rico, where Hurricane María made
landfall.
An abandoned building in the town center of Utuado, which was flooded with up to five
feet of water.
Mother and daughter Vivian Reyes and Gladys Rivera in their home in Utuado, in the room
where they spent the hurricane until the roof was blown off. This photograph was taken on
the first day they received official help.
Grave keeper Tulio Collazo Vega poses by the grave of three elderly sisters who were
killed by a landslide in Utuado the day the hurricane hit Puerto Rico. According to Collazo,
their ashes were buried almost a year later.
Magdalena Flores poses for a portrait in front of her home in Utuado. Magdalena’s
daughter died in the aftermath of the storm from complications of asthma.
San Juan mayor Carmen Yulín Cruz, who has led her own recovery efforts, separate from
those of the central and federal government, out of a makeshift warehouse and shelter at the
Roberto Clemente Coliseum. Her attacks on Trump launched her into the national spotlight
during the hurricane.
Kaleb Acevedo poses for a portrait on the new bicycle he got after Hurricane María.
Nahielys Gonzales and Yamil Rodríguez in the town square of Utuado after school.
THE IMPORTANCE OF POLITICALLY ENGAGED
 ARTISTIC AND CURATORIAL PRACTICES IN
  THE AFTERMATH OF HURRICANE MARÍA

                       Marianne Ramírez-Aponte

Puerto Rico is in the midst of one of the most urgent crises in its history, and
this crisis is not only political and financial but also social, cultural, and civic.
The US Congress has enacted a law known as PROMESA to address Puerto
Rico’s debt crisis and has installed a Financial Oversight and Management
Board with plenary powers over the budget and the resolution of the island’s
debt, thereby limiting the powers of the island’s elected government. Those
actions, along with Puerto Rico’s virtual destruction by two hurricanes, have
created a situation never before experienced in Puerto Rico or, in my
estimation, anywhere else in the world.
    This “exceptional situation” has been used to justify austerity measures
and changes in public policy that have occurred very rapidly, one after
another, affecting the quality of life of all residents. It has also triggered an
unprecedented wave of migration that has had an impact on the Puerto Rican
community in the United States, generating, especially after Hurricane María,
a sense of connectedness and solidarity between the diaspora and the island.
We have also seen an unprecedented expansion of the scope and frequency of
public debates regarding the challenges facing Puerto Rico.
    One of the positive effects of these concurrent events is that the Puerto
Rico art scene has achieved greater visibility and works by Puerto Rican
artists have been more widely disseminated. That is the result of a number of
factors: events organized by academics; invitations for Puerto Rican artists to
participate in exhibitions and residencies at museums and universities across
the United States; and the publication of reviews and articles in the media and
specialized journals and magazines, such as the New York Times, ArtForum,
Art in America, and Hyperallergic.
    Although this experience is not necessarily different from that of other
artists in countries that have faced similar situations, I think it’s important to
point out that, historically, the ambivalent place Puerto Rico holds as a
country in the community of nations is a factor that has contributed to
keeping our artistic production from enjoying a more prominent international
profile. That is, colonialism should be understood not only as a question of
political governance but also as an eminently cultural problem. In the case of
Puerto Rico, culture remains the most important basis for defining our
national identity, and assumptions should not be made about the assimilation
of the island’s culture into that of the metropolis. I think it’s necessary to
make that distinction because the struggle for Puerto Rico’s cultural and
political independence is at the root of, and the objective of, a large part of
the Puerto Rican art produced both on and off the island.
    This is also true for the art created in the aftermath of the hurricanes that
struck the island at the end of 2017. With the island’s true situation revealed
as never before, art—whose remarkable capacity for interpretation makes it a
space of democratic participation—has been fundamental in creating a
counternarrative, outside the ambit of officialdom, that is essential for
understanding Puerto Rico after María. Artists have responded with images
that not only capture the destruction caused by these meteorological events
but also make visible circumstances, conditions, racial and economic
legacies, and communities that have long been invisible or silent.
    It is my belief—as I will discuss below regarding the work of the Museo
de Arte Contemporáneo de Puerto Rico (MACPR)—that art museums, like
artists and their work, take part in the task of “revealing” social realities,
because they are sites of ideological power and of potential social agency and
change. Learning to understand the meaning of images in a hypervisual world
is a political act. In this respect, museums play an important role as formative
spaces that provide education in visual literacy and critical-thinking skills as
well as contributing to the dissemination of artworks through their contact
with local and international audiences.



Artistic responses to Hurricane María thus took on a variety of forms. Every
artistic discipline has been represented, including transdisciplinary
collaborations, urban art, comics, internet art, interventions in the public
space, performance, and community-based projects aimed at collective and
individual recovery. These works have included collaborations and
exchanges between artists who live on the island and those who live in other
places, and the circular migration that has tended to characterize the practice
of visual artists and that has intensified after the hurricanes. This circular
migration takes place partly because professional opportunities have opened
up, but especially because many artists have an interest in rethinking, from
the perspective of our own identity, a new nation-building project.
    Central to the work of these creators are issues associated with the slow
and ineffective handling of the disaster by local and federal authorities; a
colonial system in extremis and government corruption; the financial crisis
and poverty; the fragmentation of families caused by migration; the
transformation of the landscape and the potential loss of our cultural
patrimony; climate change, dependency on fossil fuels, and environmental
justice; and the disarticulation of the public patrimony, including an
education system threatened by dismantling, among so many others.
    As instances of artists’ response to Puerto Rico’s “new reality,” Felipe
Cuchí’s Ay, Carmela tu amor me estriñe! (Oh, Carmela, your love
constipates me!, 2017) and Migdalia Umpierre’s series Las cosas de María
(María’s things, 2017) employed humor and the visual language of caricature
to comment critically on the “new normal” and the deterioration of the
residents’ quality of life as they go without the provision of such basic
services as electricity, potable water, and communications.1
Las cosas de María (“Maria’s Things”) by Migdalia Umpierre, 2017.


These works also present the implications to the island’s citizens of
nutritional insecurity in a place that imports almost 90 percent of its food and
depends on imported fossil fuels for every aspect of daily life. They also
denounce the government’s shortcomings in managing the crisis and the
delay in the island’s reconstruction, with dreadful consequences for the
economy and for people’s lives. As evident for example in Carlos Dávila
Rinaldi’s New Reality Social (2018), the military presence and consequent
state of siege speaks eloquently to the general sense of insecurity on the
island, the desperate conditions faced by its citizens, and the interminable
lines and other daily hardships met with in order to gain access to articles of
basic need, leaving most citizens little time to engage in any political
participation. All this points to the importance of seeing art—as it engages,
informs, and activates people—as a vehicle for resilience and resistance in
Puerto Rico.
New Reality Social by Carlos Dávila Rinaldi, 2018.


Other artists directly tackled how the storm transformed the surrounding
landscape. For example, Yiyo Tirado’s floor installation Skyviews (2017)
presents aerial views of homes whose roofs were blown off by the hurricane
and have been replaced by blue tarps.2 The work presents forms whose
repetition generates a sense of island residents’ widespread experience of
rooflessness and fosters an awareness of the island’s poverty. The blue tarps
distributed by FEMA are scars whose color and rigid geometry disfigure the
landscape and point to Puerto Rico’s dependency on the US government.
    Sarabel Santos, on the other hand, takes a different approach to landscape
in her series of floor installations titled Groundscapes Displaced (2017–18).3
This series is based on the artist’s experience and memory of the landscape
before and after the hurricane, and it stems in part from her work
photographing the devastation in the towns of Vega Alta, Vega Baja, and
Bayamón. The varied compositions that make up the series are presented as
fragmented grids of photographs that Santos configures at will. Their
temporary installation in localities and landscapes of cities in the United
States, when Santos temporarily stays there, generates a sense of dislocation
among viewers who don’t associate images of destruction with their clean,
temperate surroundings. The documentation of the work where the
installation has been shown corresponds to the artist’s own displacement, her
passage through these cities where she was occasionally stranded, and to the
impossibility of carrying the landscape itself on her back.
    To narrate her experiences after María, Rosaura Rodríguez, whose
production involves recording daily life from both a social and a landscape
perspective, created illustrated stories in ink and watercolor.4 These stories,
recently published in the graphic novel Temporada ([Hurricane] Season,
2018), document the various states of emotion experienced both individually
and collectively as the days dragged on: restlessness, frustration, grief … In
the case of Rodríguez, the transformations in the landscape had an impact on
all aspects of her life as a woman who works on, and lives off, the land; as a
botanical artist who acquires some of her pigments and materials from the
earth; and as a teacher of art and ecology who, at her farm in Jayuya and in
her project Camp Tabonuco, gives workshops to share the knowledge
obtained with other artists and members of the community. Her work
represents a successful model of self-governance, sustainability, and fair,
healthy recovery for communities in a country without sovereignty.
Cover of Rosaura Rodríguez’s graphic novel Temporada.


    Thanks to its immediacy, its location in the everyday environment, urban
art also contributes to raising awareness and activating citizens. Urban artists,
using their murals painted in Puerto Rico and many cities in the United
States, generate activism through images that denounce injustices and
strengthen community ties and the island’s bonds with the Puerto Rican
diaspora. One example of this is the mural MAY DAY 2018, Puerto Rico by
the collective Moriviví and the artist Sandra Antongiorgi, who lives in
Chicago.5 The mural was done as part of the Borinken Me Llama Public Art
Series Festival in that city. It incorporates a quotation from the Puerto Rican
abolitionist and independentista Segundo Ruiz Belvis: “There is no
intermediate state between slavery and freedom.” The image refers to the
confrontations between the state security forces and the working class during
the protest march held May 1, 2018, in San Juan.
MAY DAY 2018, Puerto Rico by Colectivo Moriviví, Chicago, Illinois


Here, the theme of slavery points to our colonial condition and the
impoverishment of the working class as a result of the austerity measures
imposed by the Financial Oversight and Management Board. The
confrontation arises from the unequal distribution of wealth in the global
capitalist system, which produces outsize wealth for owners and insecurity
for workers. The iconography includes the shields carried by the workers that
featured the Puerto Rican flag rendered in black and white, as if signifying
mourning; the shields openly referred to the Puerto Rican flag painted on the
door of an abandoned building in San Juan on July 4, 2016, by the collective
Artistas Solidarixs y en Resistencia.6 This image went viral and has been
appropriated as a graphic element by many artists, becoming a commanding
presence in the popular imagination.
     In the same vein, other collectives composed of both local artists and
artists in the diaspora, such as Agitarte, share that spirit of outrage and
believe that art must be taken directly to communities.7 This is the case with
End the Debt! Decolonize! Liberate! Scroll Project (2018), a piece produced
after Hurricane María in response to the United States’ colonial policy toward
Puerto Rico.8 This is a portable object that is activated when it is unrolled by
citizens who gather to do a shared “reading” of the current situation of Puerto
Rico. The work, as its title indicates, includes images from the history of
Puerto Rico and images of community activism that bear witness to the many
struggles of the Puerto Rican people and its diaspora throughout more than a
hundred years of colonial domination. The vignettes portray the landscape as
a battleground, co-opting the traditional subjects of landscape in history for a
history centered around protest and contestation.
    As I have noted, condemnation of the colonial system is a recurrent
concern of Puerto Rican artists. With the series Portraits, from the Untitled
Series on Puerto Rico Financial Oversight and Management Board
Members, A Protest (2018), artist Ricardo Hernández-Santiago joins the long
tradition of Puerto Rican anti-colonialist art. In dialogue with the pictorial
strategies of that tradition, Hernández-Santiago has created a somewhat
grotesque portrayal of the Fiscal Control Board’s members. The approach to
the faces, which seem ready to break out of the picture plane, and the use of a
gold background associated with wealth and power, emphasize the board’s
focus: that Puerto Rico make good on its obligations to its creditors, many of
whom are private American investors. The series as a whole becomes an
incisive portrait of the United States’ current colonial policy, which is
focused on collecting the debt without much regard for the social effects of
the crisis.




Portrait of Natalie Jaresko, from the Untitled Series on Puerto Rico Financial Oversight
and Management Board members; A protest, by Ricardo Hernández-Santiago, 2018.


    With respect to the generalized sense of restlessness, unease, and
frustration, nothing has caused more indignation and grief among the people
of Puerto Rico than the loss of human life and the government’s delay in
recognizing the true number of deaths as a direct and indirect result of the
hurricane and of the interruption of basic services.
    Among the artistic projects addressing this issue, the one that received the
most local and international media coverage was conceived by writer Rafael
Acevedo, artist and critic Nelson Rivera, and writer and craftswoman
Gloribel Delgado Esquilín. This group sent out a call via social media to the
citizens of Puerto Rico to bring in shoes belonging to their loved ones who
had died; the shoes were to be laid out on a plaza across the street from the
capitol building in San Juan as a denunciation of government inefficiency in
handling the crisis. (See image in the essay by Erika Rodríguez in this
volume) The large-scale installation included almost three thousand pairs of
shoes and stories that people shared about the victims. The act, scheduled for
June 1, 2018, lasted forty-eight hours and was the first place where people
had been able to meet for a time of collective mourning. The artists
documented the act with photographs and note cards archiving each pair of
shoes along with their stories; they intend to exhibit and publish a book with
this material so that it will become a historical document of the hurricane’s
aftermath.



The multiple challenges that Puerto Rico faces at this moment have thus been
addressed by artists with wide-ranging creativity. But empowering the space
of art and its historical visibility at this difficult juncture should not be seen
as the exclusive responsibility of artists. Socially engaged museums—with
their ability to generate debate and enter into a dialogue with the reality that
surrounds them, their commitment to the image and its analysis—can also be
an important part of the recovery process. They can help bring to the
collective mind images and a better understanding of the precariousness of
Puerto Rico’s history and the ambitions of its people.
    I believe museums in Puerto Rico should acknowledge their political
histories and adopt positions on contemporary issues and the Puerto Rican
condition. Such is the case of the Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Puerto
Rico (MACPR). Our work, particularly during the last decade, has taken a
two-pronged approach through socially conscious exhibitions and community
outreach programs. In the post-María scenario, we have used the art in our
collection as a means of protest and have fostered education and exchange as
a means of shaping the way people reinterpret history—thus recalibrating
power.
    From that perspective, the exhibition Entredichos, which we organized as
an emergency project and opened to the public in December 2017, revealed
details of the social and political conditions of a particular moment in our
history and proposed an approach to our culture from the standpoint of the
tensions, contradictions, and complexities that define it.9 That is why we
chose the title Entredichos, a term that, in Spanish, suggests doubt as to the
honor, veracity, or possibilities of a person or thing. In legal terms,
entredicho is used in some jurisdictions to mean “injunction,” a court-ordered
halt to a potentially harmful or dangerous action. In this case, the curatorial
intent was to make viewers stop, question the “givens,” and, if necessary,
condemn.
    The exhibit was our response to the moment of grave collective danger
we face in Puerto Rico today, a situation that has exacerbated the need for
community organization and the need to build greater political and social
power for Puerto Ricans. We also felt it was urgent to respond in our own
voice(s) to the broad interest generated internationally by Hurricane María’s
destruction and our socioeconomic situation, and the many visions, both
informed and uninformed, held on the island and abroad as to our history and
the complex political relationship between Puerto Rico and the United States
—a relationship that determines the socioeconomic structures that affect
virtually every aspect of Puerto Ricans’ lives.
    The cultural struggles in Puerto Rico and the United States and our
constant negotiation with history were evident across various pieces,
including Collective Ingenuity, or the Curse of the Parrot (2010, revised
2012, 2014, 2017), by Elsa María Meléndez (viewable at
https://vimeo.com/253547917). This installation, last revised by the artist
after Hurricane María, on the one hand condemns the United States’
interventionist policy toward Puerto Rico, manifested by the passage of the
PROMESA law, and the imposition of the Financial Oversight and
Management Board. On the other hand, the work pays homage to the student
movement and its struggle against the dismantling of the University of Puerto
Rico and public education on the island. In her latest updates, Meléndez
alters the composition to include, on the wall that serves as a backdrop to the
work, the form of Puerto Rico made up of countless faces. At the bottom of
the map there are headless bodies, accompanied by dogs as symbols of the
forces of state security. The debris on the floor at the center of the piece
includes strips of cloth, shoes, necklaces, buttons, and pieces of wood pallets.
These items evoke the barricades used by striking students and the chaos
after the hurricane. Here we also find the hands of the dismembered bodies,
positioned as in a sign of distress, to symbolize the anonymity of the three
thousand deaths denied by the state. And as though that message were not
clear enough, Meléndez underscores it by incorporating hashtags, such as
#salvemoslaUPR (#letssavetheUPR), #noalaJunta (#nototheBoard), and
#teodioMaría (#IhateyouMaría). The audio of a parrot that accompanies the
piece becomes, then, a metaphor for a discourse endlessly repeated.




Collective Ingenuity, or the Curse of the Parrot by Elsa María Meléndez (2010, revised
2012, 2014, 2017).


The physical center of Entredichos was occupied by Pablo Delano’s
installation The Museum of the Old Colony (2015–17).10 Its placement in a
separate gallery within the MACPR reinforced the concept of a museum of
history and anthropology within a museum of art. This work of conceptual
installation art takes its name from a brand of soft drink that has been
consumed in Puerto Rico since the 1950s, as a reminder that the island, an
unincorporated territory of the United States, is considered the world’s oldest
colony.
    This “museum” collection comprises reproductions of archival
photographs of Puerto Rico, most of which were commissioned by agencies
of the US government. The purpose of these commissions was to produce
propaganda for a North American and worldwide audience portraying an
idealized vision of Puerto Rico’s progress under American rule. As a strategy
to facilitate the viewer’s interpretation of the images, Delano mutes his voice
as an artist, allowing the viewer to share the critical space and to face the
colonizer with no intermediation. Not only the images but also the
accompanying captions reveal the colonizer in its full arrogance, racism,
sexism, and misogyny.




Intermezzo: Ship Adrift by Garvin Sierra, 2017


At this moment Puerto Rico stands at a crossroads: on the one hand, a dead
end; on the other, a dark and dangerous precipice raised by models of society
now rendered obsolete; the road ahead is dark. In this spirit the work
Intermezzo: Ship Adrift (2017), by Garvin Sierra, suggests that we Puerto
Ricans are the twenty-first-century balseros. Trumpeted to the world in the
1950s as the showcase of democracy and a new model of progress, Puerto
Rico today is a hallucinatory ship, filled with obsolete objects and unwieldy
materials; it tries to propel itself by the pitiably weak force of a rusty old fan.
The ship’s sail, a faded Puerto Rican flag, points northward, but the ship
doesn’t move, because there is no wind. The artist’s revised version of the
piece after President Trump’s visit in the immediate aftermath of Hurricane
María takes the form of a buoy made of rolls of paper towels that blocks the
ship’s passage. It is a reminder of the president’s gesture of contempt toward
the Puerto Rican people at that moment and his continued disparagement of
us ever since.



As I have noted, the MACPR’s multipronged approach includes community-
engagement programs so that the museum’s cultural activity is projected
outside its walls to the community. With this in mind, the museum
implements a program we have called “The MAC in the Barrio: From
Santurce to Puerto Rico,” which uses the arts and culture as tools to
contribute to cultural equity and social and urban transformation. Since 2014
the program has had a presence in several communities in the municipalities
of San Juan, Guaynabo, and Cataño. The high percentage of people who live
below the poverty level in these neighborhoods has made the MACPR’s
presence a pressing civic responsibility and has led to the decentralization of
its services and the creation of programs that spill out of the metropolitan
area, where Puerto Rico’s largest cultural entities are located, to bring greater
cultural activity to the entire island.
    Among the objectives of “The MAC in the Barrio” is to critically
interpret the historical, economic, political, and social fabric out of which our
neighborhoods—our barrios—emerge and to make visible the distinct social
communities that coexist in them. In the aftermath of María and throughout
2018, the museum carried out ten art projects in communities in San Juan,
Cataño, and Guaynabo. The projects addressed such subjects as
environmental justice, housing justice, gender violence, race, migration,
cultural history, and community identity. The projects proposed and designed
together with the community are promoted under the banner of inclusion,
coexistence, and integration of the various social sectors, always watchful for
conditions that might trigger undesired gentrification.
    Two examples of these projects are Glorimar Marrero’s Juana(s) Matos
and Coco Valencia’s Lo onírico del Caño (The dreamlike aspects of the
Channel) (2018).11 The first is a series of three short films about the
contributions of Afro–Puerto Rican community leader Juana Matos and the
reaction of residents of the neighborhood named after her in Cataño to the
threats of displacement they have experienced throughout the years and
especially since Hurricane María. The second is an installation of houses
floating on the water of the Martín Peña Channel; on their walls are residents’
statements about the physical and emotional loss they suffered during and
after Hurricane María. Lo onírico del Caño is constructed out of the
experiences of the residents of this settlement, a community that emerged in
the mangrove swamps in this area some ninety years ago as part of the
intramigrations that occurred on the island after Hurricane San Ciprian (1932)
and during the Great Depression. Both projects, Marrero’s and Valencia’s,
ask questions about how to respond to climate change in a fair and just way, a
way that reflects the fact that it is the poorest among us who suffer the
greatest impacts of environmental pollution and destruction.




Lo onírico del Caño (The dreamlike aspects of the Channel) by Coco Valencia, 2018


The museum’s call to the public to learn about these truths and the broad
dissemination of these and other projects generated and sponsored by the
museum have inserted these issues into the collective consciousness. They
stir the collective mind to social and environmental awareness and inspire
citizens to rethink the status quo in order to arrive at a new ethical and civic
order. The potential for critical thought must be stimulated so that new
models of what the reconstruction and transformation of Puerto Rico should
be may be envisioned. This must be undertaken while keeping in mind the
importance of conserving our cultural patrimony without losing sight of the
inequalities and impoverishment that any such models may generate or the
destruction of our ecosystems caused by the exploitation of our natural
resources.
     In conclusion, the arts are intrinsically a social medium, both personal
and public. They defend our humanity and help remove social barriers to give
us all a better chance to progress. The work created by Puerto Rican artists in
the context of our dire socioeconomic situation and in the aftermath of the
hurricanes should be valued not only for its power to heal and prevent
cultural erosion but also for being essential to amplifying the incomplete
narrative of Puerto Rico’s colonial crisis and ensuring the connectedness of
the creative community with human ecosystems that need constant
invigoration from new ways of interpreting the world and our island at this
moment so crucial to our history and future.
1. Dianne Brás Feliciano, Emilia Quiñones Otal, and Mariel Quiñones Vélez, “The
    Impact of María on the Creative Community in Puerto Rico,” February 6, 2018,
    https://transformaccpr.com/2018/02/06/el-impacto-de-Maria-en-la-comunidad-
    creativa-en-puerto-rico/; Puerto Rico Art News, “‘Aftermath’ Recent Work by Carlos
    Davila        Rinaldo       in     Arte      @      Plaza,”      April       8,      2018,
    https://www.puertoricoartnews.com/2018/04/aftermath-obra-reciente-de-carlos.html.
2. Artishock, “Yiyo Tirado: Caribbean Blues,” Artishock: Revista de arte contemporaneo,
    http://artishockrevista.com/2017/12/19/yiyo-tirado-caribbean-blues/.
3. Sarabel                   Santos,               “Groundscapes                   Displaced,”
    http://www.sarabelsantos.com/groundspaces
4. Rosaura Rodríguez, “Temporada,” https://www.instagram.com/p/BuZDcrwBhXF/
5. Participating artists in Moriviví include Raysa Raquel Rodríguez and Shanron
    “Chachi” González Colón.
6. 80 Grados, “The Flag Is Black, Puerto Rico Is Fighting,” 80grados prensasinprisa,
    https://www.80grados.net/la-bandera-esta-de-negro-puerto-rico-estaen-pie-de-lucha/.
7. Participating artists and cultural workers in Agitarte include Jorge Díaz Ortiz,
    Estefanía Rivera, Crystal Clarity, Rafael Schragis, Emily Simons, Dey Hernández,
    Saulo Colón, and Osvaldo Budet.
8. “End        the    Debt!     Decolonize!    Liberate!    Scroll     Projects,”    AgitArte,
    http://agitarte.org/projects/end-the-debt-decolonize-liberate-scroll-project/.
9. Marianne Ramírez-Aponte, “Entredichos: New acquisitions of the permanent
    collection of MACPR,” Museo de Arte Contemporaneo de Puerto Rico, http://mac-
    pr.org/entredichos-2018.html.
10. David Gonzalez, “A New Museum for an Old Colony, Puerto Rico,” The New York
    Times, November 15, 2017, https://lens.blogs.nytimes.com/2017/11/15/a-new-
    museum-for-an-old-colony-puerto-rico/; “The Museum of the Old Colony,” Hampshire
    College Art Gallery, https://sites.hampshire.edu/gallery/the-museum-of-the-old-
    colony/.
11. Mariela Fullana Acosta, “Glorimar Marrero goes through the story of Juana Matos,” El
    Nuevo                 Día,               November                 11,                2018,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/entretenimiento/cultura/nota/glorimarmarrerorecorrelahistoriadejuanama
    2458869/; Museo de Arte Contemporaneo de Puerto Rico, “MAC in the neighborhood
    presents ‘Lo Onirico del Cano,’ a project by Coco Valencia,” November 16, 2018,
    http://90grados.com/arte/mac-en-el-barrio-presenta-lo-onirico-del-cano-un-proyecto-
    de-coco-valencia/.
         SI NO PUDIERA HACER ARTE, ME IBA

  The Aesthetics of Disaster as Catharsis in Contemporary
                     Puerto Rican Art1

                        Carlos Rivera Santana

   Here, in this extremest danger of the will, art approaches, as a saving
   and healing enchantress; she alone is able to transform these
   nauseating reflections on the awfulness or absurdity of existence into
   representations wherewith it is possible to live: these are the
   representations of the sublime as the artistic subjugation of the awful.
                                                       —Friedrich Nietzsche2

Shortly after Hurricane María devastated Puerto Rico, the island’s historic
Museum of the Americas made a call for artists of all media to create works
to “purge, purify and liberate their feelings” about their posthurricane
experiences.3 Over fifty artists contributed performance art, theater, poetry,
music, art workshops, and more to the event, held December 10, 2017,
entitled Catarsis: Re/contruyendo después de María (Catharsis:
Re/constructing after María). This event crystallized the urgency of using art
as a vehicle for (social) catharsis, a practice that continues to be used by
individual artists, collectives, community organizations, art projects, and
other art institutions on the island and abroad, through mural art, community
paintings, art exhibitions, literature, music, and many other aesthetic
expressions. The affective process of catharsis through art does not refer in
this case to using art to overcome psychological disorders in individual
therapy. Here, using art for social catharsis refers to an aesthetic process in
which people can collectively express the complex or contradictory social,
cultural, and political situations that confront them. They accomplish this
through the successful transfiguration of complex or contradictory realities—
such as the ones experienced by Puerto Ricans in the aftermath of Hurricane
María—into another intelligible form or medium.4
     Every cathartic activity requires a genre or narrative frame that facilitates
the purge and liberation of a given affect, especially in the case of traumatic
experiences. The narrative frame of much posthurricane art is an “aesthetics
of disaster,” which here refers to ugliness, to representations of a natural
disaster’s effects—its chaos, destruction, and decadence—and to effects of
the societal disasters of colonization and capitalism.5 The word disaster has
its roots in disastro, an Italian word derived from the Latin dis, a negative
meaning “bad,” and astro, meaning “star”; disaster thus directly translates as
“bad star” or “ill-starred,” meaning an inauspicious arrangement of the stars
or constellations, which bring bad luck and unforeseen misfortunes.6 This
understanding derives from sixteenth-century European cosmology, in which
the universe is governed by a divine balance that the cosmos and kingdoms
(or human governments) all formed part of. In other words, disastro meant a
disordered or mismanaged occurrence. Therefore, the meaning of disaster is
not purely a matter of nature; an aesthetic of disaster can contain meanings of
nature as well as of order or governance and, thus, of human influence. This
is evident in posthurricane contemporary Puerto Rican art, which
conceptually suggests that people play a role in the chaos of disaster.
     In using the aesthetics of disaster, recent Puerto Rican art, particularly
visual art, tells the complex story of the entanglements among Hurricane
María, capitalism, and colonization. What follows is a brief presentation of
the posthurricane surge of art on the island and in the United States. To
exemplify how an aesthetics of disaster is engaging in social catharsis, three
posthurricane art pieces are discussed, specifically Gabriella Torres Ferrer’s
Valora tu mentira americana (2018), presented at “PM” at Embajada gallery,
in Puerto Rico; Tenemos sed [We are thirsty]: Where did our presupuesto
nacional [national budget] go? (2017) by Rafael Vargas Bernard, presented
at the Focus on Puerto Rico 777 International Mall, Miami; and the Rebuild
Comerío installation (2018), exhibited at “Defend Puerto Rico” at the
Caribbean Cultural Center and African Diaspora Institute in New York by
Defend Puerto Rico project-collective. This essay is far from representative
of the posthurricane aesthetic expressions that are (still) unfolding before our
eyes. In the pages that follow, however, I will attempt to understand how
Puerto Rico’s posthurricane art is thinking through the effects of María and
its links with colonization, via the frame of an aesthetics of disaster. Its aim is
to examine how contemporary Puerto Rican art, through social catharsis, is
helping encode the story of the effects of the hurricane in its fullest
complexity.




Diasporamus, by Patrick McGrath Muñíz, 2018. Oil on canvas.


    The Puerto Rican arts space has been flooded with works and exhibitions
that produce a catharsis that is societal, expressing not only (if at all) an
individual’s processing of psychopathological symptoms but also social-
political discontent. The artist, the viewer, the networks of people who
inform the artists and are informed by the artists and viewers all express and
disseminate a message that is manifested, in this case, in the form of the
contemporary art piece. In other words, art is inherently social because it is
produced in a web of human connection, and it must, therefore, be culturally
relevant for a given group of people. Dozens of exhibitions and hundreds of
contemporary Puerto Rican art pieces using an aesthetic of disaster to portray
posthurricane themes—such as Diasporamus (2018) by Patrick McGrath
Muñíz shown above—have been displayed in Puerto Rico and in cities that
have a large diasporic population (mainly in the US). To this we can add the
dozens of urban art murals posthurricane in Puerto Rican and US cities. A
few examples of exhibitions are “PM” (San Juan), “Defend Puerto Rico”
(New York), “Puerto Rico: Defying Darkness” (Albuquerque), “Puerto
Ricans Underwater” (New York), “Focus on Puerto Rico” (Miami), to name
a few. Artists such as Patrick McGrath Muñíz, Elsa María Meléndez, Frances
Gallardo, Gabriella Torres Ferrer, Juan Sánchez, Richard Santiago, Antonio
Martorell, Adrian Viajero Román, Lionel Cruet, and many others have also
responded to the hurricane with their art, capitalizing on the versatility of the
narrative frame of disaster.
    This outpouring of posthurricane Puerto Rican art makes evident the
overwhelming drive to make sense of the naturally accelerated disaster of
coloniality and the Puerto Rican sociopolitical situation. For instance,
Diasporamus (2018) by Patrick McGrath Muñíz is an example of a piece that
invites the viewer to contemplate an aesthetic of disaster, weaving together
the themes of posthurricane disaster, colonization (by referring to Spanish
Renaissance art), climate change, capitalism and forced displacement. When
contemplating McGrath Muñíz’s work, the eye immediately jumps to the
center of the painting, where there is a shirtless anguish-stricken man holding
a paper towel—a direct reference to the controversial incident involving US
president Donald Trump when he visited the island—over a visibly saddened
woman in an almost fetal position, presumably protecting herself from the
peril suggested in the painting as a whole. This allegorical work functions as
a conceptualist loop of gyrating local and global narratives of disaster that
yarns themes of capitalism and colonization. The work brings together
multiple references to Renaissance art, the depiction of vicious floods, the
widely seen image of Puerto Ricans trying to get a cell phone signal after the
hurricane, an explicit commentary on migration and forced displacement,
iconic consumerist symbols of capitalism (Starbucks, Shell, and Yamaha,
rephrased as Yamejo-di) and iconic Puerto Rican representations that range
from the mundane to the satirical—for instance, the pig that travels in the
small vessel, with the jíbaro (rural dweller), and the manatee swimming in
the floodwaters, among other (sometimes hidden) narratives and symbols.
Diasporamus capitalizes twice on the (European) Renaissance artistic forms
from the past and the previous Puerto Rican histories of migration to the
United States suggesting a simultaneous commentary on the two histories of
colonization—those of Spain and the United States McGrath uses an
aesthetics of disaster in this piece to tell the complex story of how
posthurricane effects can be tied to colonization, displacement, capitalism,
and Puerto Rican culture.
    Now let us focus on three unexamined illustrative pieces that show how
colonialism and human and natural disaster coalesce into an aesthetic
assemblage. “PM” (2017), at the Embajada gallery in San Juan, Puerto Rico,
was one of the first exhibitions that explicitly addressed posthurricane Puerto
Rico.7 The curation by Christopher Rivera clearly juxtaposes the gallery’s
chaotic “outside” with its clean “inside,” which showcases the imagination
and memories of those who experienced and were affected, in one way or
another, by the disaster. Most of the exhibition’s pieces were crafted after the
hurricane, capitalizing on an explicit curation that highlighted precarious
posthurricane everyday materials, yet conserving a minimalistic feel. The
exhibition also produced an immersive experience into the simultaneously
chaotic and calm posthurricane experience, given that the gallery was a
controlled space in a Puerto Rico still lacking electricity and basic goods.
    Some pieces in “PM” showcased more than others the cathartic character
of an aesthetics of disaster. An example is Gabriella Torres’s Valora tu
mentira americana (Value your American lie, 2018), which displaces the
room with an unembellished piece of the Puerto Rican Power Authority’s
failed infrastructure—a utility pole—that should be “outside” and denotes
one of the main infrastructure problems in posthurricane Puerto Rico, the
lack of electricity (figure 2). At the same time, Torres’s piece, with its ample
illumination, offers a sort of posthurricane relief to the viewer who still has
no electricity. Destruction in the comfort of the gallery room, next to an air-
conditioner’s vent, stimulates the viewer to make sense of the destruction
outside in a (relatively) calm way. The surreal experience of destruction is
contained in the room, conserving the uneasiness of displacement and the
danger of torn hanging electrical cables, and it allows (almost calls) the
viewer to closely examine the story that this object is telling.
Figure 2. Valora tu mentira americana, by Gabriella Torres Ferrer, 2018. Mixed-media
installation. Courtesy of the artist.


    Utility poles in Puerto Rico are often used for political propaganda, and
this is reflected in Torres Ferrer’s piece, which features a flyer attached to the
middle of her utility pole. The flyer reads “Valora tu ciudadanía americana”
(Value your American citizenship), and it continues below with “Garatízala,
vota estadidad, 11 de junio” (Guarantee it, vote for statehood on June 11),
which alludes to a highly questionable plebiscite on Puerto Rico’s
relationship with the United States that occurred two months before the
hurricane. Given how the piece contains disaster, the message in the political
propaganda displays the contradiction between the perceived protection of
United States citizenship in Puerto Rico and the posthurricane destruction
and ongoing infrastructural disaster— focusing on electrical infrastructure—
that the artist links with the futility of Puerto Rican politics, which she
extends to the political (colonial) relationship with the United States. In other
words, Torres’s piece invades the gallery room with the gigantic collapse of
Puerto Rican infrastructure, and the artist identifies the heart of the human
disaster: Puerto Rican politics and its asymmetrical power relationship with
the United States.
     The June 11 plebiscite was highly controversial because the options
available to voters did not include an “evolved” version of the current
commonwealth status, the option supported by one of the major political
parties. Moreover, the plebiscite suffered from massive voter abstention.8
The ironic twist of the piece’s title and its materials gesture toward a close
reexamination of Puerto Rico’s political and colonial status, which was
exposed—to an extent—by the power of a hurricane. The irony of the piece’s
title, Value Your American Lie, also provokes the viewer to remember the
political event of the plebiscite in the context of a posthurricane disaster that
showcased, through the shattered utility pole, the futility of Puerto Rican
politics in the face of its infrastructure’s hyperfragility. In the face of bare
destruction, Torres Ferrer’s piece leads the viewer to question the apparent
safety net of Puerto Rican political status, its US citizenship, and therefore its
(presumed) preferential relationship with the federal government—causing
the rude awakening that Puerto Ricans are colonial subjects—while also
inviting the viewer to question the lie or ask, How did we arrive at this “lie”?
     In Miami, “Focus on Puerto Rico” was an exhibition established before
Hurricane María hit the island; half of its artists were stranded on the island
and could not arrive at the 777 International Mall to exhibit their art. Because
of this, “Focus on Puerto Rico” became more relevant as the artists in Miami
began to communicate from afar their fears and anxieties about the situation
in Puerto Rico. At the same time, the exhibition became a voice for Puerto
Ricans in Florida, where there are almost one million Puerto Ricans, to react
to and make sense of the disaster. The artists of “Focus on Puerto Rico”
showed pieces that urgently engaged in a form of catharsis from another
location, that of Puerto Ricans in the diaspora.
     Rafael Vargas Bernard addressed a pressing issue in the hurricane’s
aftermath, potable water. In Tenemos sed [We are thirsty]: Where did our
presupuesto nacional [national budget] go? (2017), Vargas Bernard uses the
issue of potable water, corrosion, and a suggestion of a decaying water
infrastructure to encourage the viewer to reexamine Puerto Rican politics,
corruption, decadence, and injustice (figure 3). As in Torres’s piece, disaster
becomes the form in which the viewer’s senses are affected (Vargas
Bernard’s piece causes thirst and disgust); the viewer is then led to make
sense of the piece’s elements as they relate to the political causes of this
decadent vision. Vargas Bernard does not use the hurricane’s immediate
consequences—as Torres does with her utility pole, snapped by the hurricane
winds—but instead calls attention to the explicit corrosion of disuse,
presumably because there is no consistent running water. The aesthetic form
of disaster then becomes intentionally cathartic, redolent of a decadent
political infrastructure whose assemblage is a product of hundreds of years of
colonization.




Tenemos sed, ¿Where did our presupuesto nacional go?, by Rafael Vargas Bernard, 2017.
Mixed-media installation. Miami. Photo by On the Real Film.


     Furthermore, in Tenemos sed, running water filters through the walls and
the uneconomical water pipes, making a case for water as a metaphor for the
Puerto Rican budget—the island’s public funds filter out from the walls,
drying up and corroding the whole system of distribution. The interplay
between Vargas Bernard’s piece and its conceptualization expressed in its
title is prefaced by ideological political concern mobilized by the primacy of
water through the affective pull of “thirst” and disgust, drawing attention to
the real effects that corroded political situations have on people’s lives.
Corrosion functions as a near homophonic and synonymous relationship with
corruption (in function) that serves as a hyperreal allegory to posthurricane
experiences. The materiality of the corroded sinks, walls, and floors
expresses colonial politics in Puerto Rico, particularly in a posthurricane
situation, and it can be more real and more illustrative than the denotation of
corruption. The cathartic aesthetic expression through “disaster” in Vargas
Bernard’s piece is trying to process the materiality of the individual and the
collective—suggested in the fact that there are two sinks—and to urge the
viewer to reflect politically on the visceral, urgent moment that Puerto Rico
has lived through in the aftermath of Hurricane María.
    In New York at the Caribbean Cultural Center and African Diaspora
Institute (CCCADI) from February 2018, the “Defend Puerto Rico” exhibit
was displayed, focusing on the posthurricane community’s efforts from
Puerto Rico and abroad to rebuild Puerto Rico, using an aesthetic of disaster
form that highlights recovery efforts. The Defend Puerto Rico project has
existed since 2016 to address myriad issues concerning Puerto Rican identity
and its political relationship with the United States, particularly in the
aftermath of the creation of the bankruptcy board through the PROMESA
law.9 This transmedia art project aimed to document the complexities of
Puerto Rican culture on the island and in the United States, but in the
aftermath of Hurricane María the necessity to address the situation became
more urgent. The exhibit, however, displayed not only the hurricane’s
aftermath but also the community’s efforts to rebuild Puerto Rico through
many grassroots initiatives. The project uses an array of media, from
photography to 360-degree augmented reality captured from drones, which
provides an immersive experience of what Puerto Ricans are doing to recover
from the hurricane.
    Rebuild Comerío: Imagine a Puerto Rico Recovery Designed by Its
Communities (2018), by the Defend Puerto Rico project-collective (figure 4),
is an immersive installation assembled to highlight Puerto Rico’s recovery by
placing Puerto Ricans from the town of Comerío at the center of the design
for its rebuilding through community action via organizations such as La
Maraña and Coco de Oro. The juxtaposition of posthurricane disaster and the
work of recovery in Comerío displayed in photographs and drone maps, all in
the mosaic shape of the island, functions as a cathartic display eliciting hope
and suggesting autonomous community healing. The island’s mosaic shape
from representations of Comerío comments on the recursive character of
individuality and community, from person to town, from town to nation, and
from national again to local (Puerto Rico to Comerío). The interactive
character of this installation documents the community support that people
provide in rebuilding a town and the participation of an artist and many other
actors in the installation. Lastly, it pieces together artist and subject or object.
Its transmedia, immersive character and the indistinction between artist,
authors, and subjects/objects functions as a cathartic invitation to action while
mobilizing the rebuilding of Comerío and Puerto Rico as something that is
possible.




Rebuild Comerío: Imagine a Puerto Rico Recovery Designed by Its Communities, Defend
Puerto Rico project-collective, 2018. Mixed media.


    Rebuild Comerío is above all a story that tries to capture the complex
dimensions of disaster, from the narrative of chaos to inspiring stories. The
collective chooses to highlight these inspiring stories of community
rebuilding while revealing intentional absences of government, unless they
are represented as part of the chaotic narrative of disaster, as in the destroyed
power infrastructure and fragments of blue FEMA (Federal Emergency
Management Agency) tarps. The highlighted story here gestures toward a
long history of local adversities. Despite the crudeness of the aftermath of
these natural and human disasters, there is a visceral invitation to reinvigorate
community through grassroots action, highlight the Puerto Rican cultural
identity as a source of resilience, and to combat cultural colonization (see, for
instance, the cuatro guitar at top left and music records at right, among other
iconic cultural symbols).


                      ART AS SOCIAL CATHARSIS

Social catharsis through cultural aesthetic expression channels apparently
contradictory perceptions to be processed through the affective and creative
character of art. Yet catharsis needs a form or a frame to be able to paint the
complex picture of an apparently contradictory reality. Hurricane María laid
bare a material reality that Puerto Rican contemporary art is trying to make
sense of through the productive frame of disaster. The complex history of the
colonial, cultural, and sociopolitical situation of Puerto Ricans cannot be
fully described nor engaged in a one-dimensional manner. It is not surprising
that the form or aesthetics of disaster function as a productive frame to
comment on both the posthurricane dimension and the colonial dimension
that permeate many spheres of everyday life, from the personal to the
collective, from the cultural to the political, and from the real to the
imaginary.
    Two weeks after the hurricane hit Puerto Rico, I spoke with an artist
about the effects of the hurricane and about the many Puerto Ricans who
were moving to the United States, including many young artists. The artist
said, “If I could not do art, I would leave [Puerto Rico] [Si no pudiera hacer
arte, me iba].” I do not believe this statement speaks only of the
psychological healing capacity of aesthetic discourse. It also expresses the
sociopolitical capacity of a grounded aesthetics to provide the means to defy
and resist colonization, capitalism, and all other dangers facing the vulnerable
island.
1. An expanded version of this essay was published as: Carlos Rivera-Santana,
   “Aesthetics of Disaster as Decolonial Aesthetics: Making Sense of the Effects of
   Huricane María through Puerto Rican Contemporary Art,” Cultural Studies (2019)
   https://doi.org/10.1080/09502386.2019.1607519.
2. Friedrich Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy and Other Writings (Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press, 1999), 37.
3. See      press    release    on    the     Museo     de    las    Americas      website,
   https://www.museolasamericas.org/catarsis.html.
4. Lev Vygotsky, “The Psychology of Art,” Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 30,
   no. 4 (1972): 570.
5. Umberto Eco, On Ugliness (London: MacLehose, 2007). I use ugliness in contrast to
   how visual arts typically capitalize on the beauty of natural disasters, as in Jenifer
   Presto’s “aesthetics of catastrophe.” Her concept focuses on an aesthetics of beauty that
   contains sublime visions of destruction and highlights the decadence of the beautiful
   with a transfigured splendor.
6. Art Carden, “Shock and Awe: Institutional Change, Neoliberalism, and Disaster
   Capitalism,” SSRN, November 18, 2008, last revised May 20, 2009,
   https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1302446.
7. The exhibition’s materials included a list of almost one hundred phrases— “post-
   María, post-mortem, particular matter, post-melancolía”—using the acronym PM.
8. Frances Robles, “23% of Puerto Ricans Vote in Referendum, 97% of Them for
   Statehood,”          New         York        Times,        June         11,        2017,
   https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/11/us/puerto-ricans-vote-on-the-question-of-
   statehood.html.
9. The Puerto Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act (PROMESA) is
   a restructuring law legislated by the US Congress in 2016 that created a financial
   oversight and management board to oversee any legislation that has budget
   implications created by the Puerto Rican government. The board is constituted by
   federal government appointees and therefore unelected by Puerto Ricans. For a
   scholarly cultural studies analysis of PROMESA, see Pedro Cabán, “PROMESA,
   Puerto Rico and the American Empire,” Latino Studies 16, no. 2 (2018): 161–84.
    ART AND A THRESHOLD CALLED DIGNITY

                      TIAGO (Richard Santiago)

                                                                 Here lies Juan
                                                               Here lies Miguel
                                                             Here lies Milagros
                                                                 Here lies Olga
                                                               Here lies Manuel
                                                      who died yesterday today
                                                   and will die again tomorrow
                                                                  Always broke
                                                                  Always owing
                                                                 Never knowing
                                                  that they are beautiful people
                                                                 Never knowing
                                             the geography of their complexion

                                         —Pedro Pietri, Puerto Rican Obituary


The parents, just like every other adult Puerto Rican, are still holding on to
the vague idea that the hurricane will go either north or south and not harm
the island. I mean, a few days before, Hurricane Irma had almost the exact
same trajectory, and it went up north, affecting only some regions. But this
time, maybe eight hours before it makes contact, the father knows they will
not escape the destruction. The family has tried to secure their Puerta de
Tierra apartment to the best of their abilities. They take the dog out for one
last time before the storm. Outside, the winds already feel like a category 1
hurricane, but they still have seven hours until it arrives with all its strength.
Mother and father take the two boys, a six and a seven years old, into the
smallest room. This is the only room where they feel a minimum sense of
security. That’s where they will spend most of the next twelve hours without
electricity or communication … but at least together. Outside that room, the
beast roars. The ceiling falls down and the rest of the apartment is inundated.
They lose almost everything. But they are alive. And with that comes the
doubting, the decision making, the survival, the ultimate intent to protect the
children from any harm and confronting the storm after the storm.
    That’s how my journey and my family’s journey began in September
2017. A roller coaster ride named displacement whose unpredictable motion
has kept us vulnerable throughout.
    We spent the following weeks in that little room. There, we began the
early mornings worrying about the bloody bedsheets from the mosquito bites
on our children’s bodies, and there planned what the task at hand would be
each passing day. In that little room, I cried alone after leaving all of them at
the airport a month later, and there I crashed seeking rest each night after
collecting what could be saved from my inundated art studio.
    Our displacement took us to Chicago, where we were finally reunited on
December 25. In Chicago, the Puerto Rican diaspora and their solidarity were
a key ingredient to helping us cope and mitigate the traumas that María
ingrained in our family. Becoming the cochair of the Arts and Culture
Committee of the Puerto Rican Agenda of Chicago was an important element
as well. I fully immersed myself in hurricane relief efforts focused on artists.
Then the aim became to help La Escuela de Artes Plásticas y Diseño de
Puerto Rico (School of Visual Arts and Design of Puerto Rico), where I used
to work as a professor. This institution is the only autonomous art university
in our country and has for decades been a melting-pot for the top artists to
come out of Puerto Rico. Its importance in our country for the past fifty years
is equivalent to an artery in our body, yet, along with the government’s
economic blows, the hurricane almost killed this university.
    Initially, the relief efforts led me to create an event called “Rican
Renaissance” on Division Street, the Puerto Rican hub of Chicago. I
collaborated with multiple programs founded by the Puerto Rican Cultural
Center, as well as with the help of young local artists sympathetic to our
cause. Poetry, art, music, and Puerto Rican food were uniting elements in two
days of coming together for the relief of the arts in our nation. The success of
the event led me to return to the island, for the first time after María, to put
the raised money directly in the artists’ hands and contribute, as well, to the
university.
     An organization called the Puerto Rican Agenda of Chicago launched an
intense campaign called the 3Rs for Puerto Rico, focused on rescue, relief,
and rebuilding. Through multiple fund-raisers that engaged Chicagoans in
our efforts and by participating in countless interviews during the following
months, we helped keep the name of Puerto Rico on the table during the early
stages of relief even while we were being portrayed as naggers by the US
government’s white elites. I barely had time to think about creating art. After
María, I couldn’t even conceive the idea of putting a brushstroke anywhere. It
was about rescue, relief, and rebuilding. It was about my two kids and trying
to find a little bit of peace for them.
     But there was a nuisance in my mind. There was an annoyance that grew
daily in my heart. Out of that burden I wrote the following proposal:


          THE FRAILTY OF STRENGTH AND VICE-VERSA
       A traveling exhibition and call to action …
       The final moments of life for 911 people who died on, or soon after, September
   20th, 2017, in Puerto Rico and whose remains were cremated by their government
   without official examinations, remain a mystery as do the causes of their deaths.
   What is clear is the government’s intent to hide the real number of casualties
   derived from Hurricane María, the strongest natural disaster of this kind to hit
   Puerto Rico in its history.
       The obscurity of their deaths in this US colony is compounded by another
   indignity: The identities of these nine hundred and eleven people remain unknown.
       THE FRAILTY OF STRENGTH AND VICE-VERSA is a last-ditch effort to
   bring closure and help spring forth funding for the Center for Investigative
   Journalism in their (and our) quest to find the truth by confronting the Government
   of Puerto Rico on this regard.
       With this exhibit I intend to erase the anonymity of the 911 victims of
   Hurricane María, who were obscurely cremated by the government of Puerto Rico,
   by manifesting their presence through a conceptually symbolic artistic form. This
   show hopes to be an incisive and efficient gesture of resistance to the neoliberal
   forces that threaten Puerto Rico and the future of its people.
       I will be creating 911 ten-inch by eight-inch Monotypes representing each
   person.
       A Monotype is a unique image printed from a polished plate, made of glass or
   metal, which has been painted with a design in ink. The image is transferred from
   the plate onto a sheet of paper by pressing the two together, usually using a
   printing press.
       Monotypes can also be created by inking an entire surface and then, using
   brushes or rags, removing ink to create areas of light from a solid area of opaque
   color.
       The uniqueness of each Monotype intends to reference the human fingerprint
   and the fact that its impression affords an infallible means of personal
   identification, because the ridge arrangement on every finger of every human
   being is unique and does not alter with growth or age.
       Each Monotype design will be printed on paper with a xerograph paper towel
   design alluding to the White House’s disconnect to the loss and misery Puerto
   Ricans are going through. It’s my way to turn one man’s cynical disposition into
   something righteous.


     And thus, another journey began. “The Frailty of Strength and Vice-
Versa” soon took a life of its own. At first, friends and family members
supported the project and became the first collaborators. But then, after the
first presentation at the Boathouse Gallery, an alternative art space in
Humboldt Park, the installation started to connect with people all on its own.
Strangers were reaching out to be a part of the process. There were articles
and interviews being done about it. I was invited to bring the installation in
different formats to the Museum of Contemporary Art of Chicago,
Connecticut College, the University of Massachusetts in Boston, and other
spaces and communities. Also, it became the reason why I was invited to
participate in “Aftershocks of Disaster: Puerto Rico a Year after María,” at
Rutgers University on September 28, 2018.
     Hurricane María unveiled a lot of the real Puerto Rico to the world and to
ourselves. This is also true in the arts. One night as I worked on the
installation, I watched CBS news correspondent David Begnaud interview a
group of Puerto Rican artists (some of whom I love very dearly) as they
talked about how “María was the best thing that ever happened to Puerto
Rico.” They said people on the island were being sedentary, thus perpetuating
the agelong misconception of Puerto Ricans as lazy, which clearly contrasts
with the stories of resiliency after the hurricane. It was nauseating to hear the
worst kind of neoliberal ideas being splattered on international television and
these artists, knowingly or not, expressing themselves as the worst kind of
disaster capitalists.
    It’s my opinion that the concept of tribalism is one that is connected
directly to the colonial mind-set. This condition is a common one in Puerto
Rico and also within our artistic community. Artistic trends divide and
fluctuate through our art scenes in groups that resemble secretive Masonic
lodges. It was through those groups that the information regarding art relief
funds, grants, and residencies was transmitted after the hurricane; artists
outside these networks lacked opportunities for aid. Artists within the nexus
recommended each other and, in some cases, accepted multiple grants and
fully funded artist residencies knowing there were other artists in worse
conditions than they who simply were not part of their circle. María thus
unmasked a lack of political consciousness and social empathy among my
peers.
    I feel very disconnected from the tribalist form of thinking, so in many
ways, “The Frailty of Strength and Vice-Versa” became my shelter. This
installation became a therapeutic safe haven for me from the moment of its
conception. At the same time, it has served as a connective element among
people who are still mourning our dead and as a way to ease their pain
throughout that process. Its essence lies in the facts that it cannot be done
without the collaboration of caring individuals and its conclusion can be
achieved only with their participation. Another important element is that it is
conceived to raise funds for a cause outside of myself.
Photographer: Sofi Lalonde, OLYMPUS DIGITAL CAMERA, May 2018 Boathouse
Gallery, Humboldt Park, Chicago, IL


    Pablo Picasso’s Guernica, Théodore Géricault’s Raft of the Medusa, and
Vincent van Gogh’s The Potato Eaters are but three examples of a myriad of
artworks in history that depict affliction and suffering. Unlike other
professions in which one’s job is to report or study those kinds of
circumstances, these artists were drawn to interpret them, to express the
human condition of the times, and to show how those conditions affect them.
Their interest in this subject matter was not economically but rather
emotionally driven. Heartbroken doesn’t begin to describe how I felt, and still
feel, after the hurricane. That devastation fueled the artwork I’ve been doing
since. I find it troubling and distasteful to see peers making images of other
people’s misery throughout their process of struggle and survival for personal
gain, and I suggest to them to reach out to community leaders, nonprofit
organizations, or specific individuals who are still hard at work in the
recovery efforts. I urge those artists to give part of the proceeds from the
sales to the people depicted in the same artwork they were “inspired” by. But
mostly, I urge those artists to actively engage with those communities. It will
change their lives, and their work, for the better.
    In a nutshell, most people take comfort in being able to walk in the dark
from their bed to the kitchen and grab any snack they choose in the middle of
the night. It means there is a connection between them and the environment
they have created. Home is a place of comfort and of control. That sense of
order, whatever form it takes, shelters us from the chaos and unpredictability
of the outside world. From fear itself.
    Having lost my home and finding myself a displaced refugee, I have been
decontextualized by the world. The only way now is to reconstruct. The path
is a continuous search for truth. My artwork will be forever changed. Within
me resonates the memory of early sunset in San Juan—before my eyes is the
vivid, saturated scale of the oceanfront light and atmosphere, which breezed
and thundered deeply in the shadows.
                   PICKING UP THE PIECES

                             Adrian Roman

Since October 2, 2017, a week after the hurricane made landfall, I traveled
every month to Puerto Rico bringing relief aid and assisting in the recovery
and rebuilding efforts. My work centered around the municipality of San
Sebastian, where my paternal family is from. In the weeks after the storm,
this municipality experienced great difficulty receiving assistance due to
blocked roads from fallen trees, flooding, and landslides. While delivering
aid to these areas, I met many people with heartbreaking survival stories that
I tried to incorporate into my work.
     The first community I delivered supplies to in San Sebastian was in El
Culebrinas where I met an elderly women by the name of Digna Quiles.
White Digna was very welcoming and invited me into her home, she was
clearly traumarized from the effects of María. Digna was approximately sixty
years old at the time and about five feet tall. Her husband passed away eight
months prior to the storm, and she was left to live alone with her dog. She
lived in a small neighborhood known as Villa Sofia, which is adjacent to Rio
Culebrinas. During the storm, the river, as well as the smaller tributaries and
waterways that branch off of it, swelled and rose into the streets flooding the
neighborhood, including Digna’s home. As the water level rose to over eight
feet inside, the force of the flood water combined with constant rain and
hurricane winds forced Digna and her dog our of their home. Digna was
rescued by a neighbor, but unfortunately, her dog could not be rescued. When
I enter Digna’s home, she had no furniture, visible water damage was
everywhere, and she was sleeping on a child’s mattress on the floor. Like
most people in the wakes of hurricanes Irma and María, she had no access to
clean drinking water, and was forced to collect rainwater in five-gallon
buckets. My time spent with Digna inspired me not only to create the latest
portrait installation Sobrevivientes for my Caja de Memoria Viva series, but
also to create a new collection of artworks to reimagine the scope of María’s
damage called Picking up the Pieces.
     Picking Up the Pieces provides an intimate view of life post-María, and
the unfortunate “new normal” it has created for Puerto Rican people. The
collection consists of drawings, installations, and miniature sculptures that
reflect intimate moments experienced during my travels throughout the island
bringing relief aid, supporting and helping with recovery and rebuilding
efforts for the past year.
     The installation includes a special collection of found objects I’ve named
PR-tifacts, that have been donated by residents, as well as gathered from
giant piles of rubbish scattered around barrios, beaches, and on properties
where a home once stood. These PR-tifacts are more than just damaged
property, they are objects that transmit the energy of the people who once
owned them. They represent the destruction of the fabric of ordinary life; the
memories of a life once lived, the imagination of our children, our love, our
history, our pride, our faith, and all that defines who we are as Puerto Ricans.
     These items demonstrate, in part, what the landscape of the island looked
like post-María. The combination of artworks and found objects all woven
together create portraits of individual lives profoundly touched by trauma and
tragedy, travail and resilience. For weeks and months following María,
families were cleaning up damage from their homes, and for many the work
still continues.
Caja De Memoria Viva III: Sobrevivientes: Digna Quiles (detail) Charcoal on wood
(outside) 2018
Caja De Memoria Viva III: Sobrevivientes: Digna Quiles (detail) Charcoal on wood
(outside) 2018
Caja De Memoria Viva III: Sobrevivientes: Digna Quiles (detail) Mixed Media and PR-
tifacts (inside) 2018
Family Portrait. Photo of Adrián’s great grandmother, opposite nails from her house that
was destroyed by hurricane María. Digital print, cardboard photo studio picture frame,
rusted nails.
       PART IV
Capitalizing on the Crisis
           SINVERGÜENZA SIN NACIÓN1

                      Raquel Salas Rivera

                                             para josé, ana, carlos y helen


vi las mejores almas de mi generación
engullidas por el colonialismo,
anestesiando sus heridas en un pozo de alcohol
con un torbellino de no sé qué totalidad pendiente.
las vi hablar de la muerte con esperanza,
llevar los cementerios de anillos,
quemar cuanta mata y matanza nos prometieron,
ocupar tierras y edificios,
odiar los ojos azules de rosselló,
escupirle en la cara a la justicia
por embustera,

estar mal y ser hermosos,

aguantar todo el dolor del mundo entre las cejas.

les toqué el pecho para que lloraran
y la ternura era un campo minado.

sin coordinación, los vi atropellar con un abrazo
el hormiguero defensivo del bienestar.

vi que, en sus manos, la supervivencia valía un trapo,
que el linaje no cree en sí mismo si la muerte brinca citas.

vi que eran ángeles que por más de 500 años
llevan preparando el vuelo,
sin saber si queda ya cielo ni trompeta.

vi las mejores almas de mi generación perder su generosidad.
el dolor les hizo una mala jugada.

las vi colgarle el teléfono a fema
y preparar palomas mensajeras con el papeleo.
entre agotamientos, las vi construyendo techos y cerrando riñas,
enfocándose en cosas como luz, agua y entierro,
deseosos de que la tierra fuese tierra:
antígonas enterrando con pala robá.

eran volátiles como países,
dominados como países,
degollados como países.

vi que a diario desaparecían en el vuelo estático de la soledad.

fui testigo de la quema del arroz,
el giro del yagrumo.

estuvo mal lo que les pasó,
que les dieran un rompecabezas
y dijeran toma, recoje los escombros
del dizque país.

le explicaban a los hijos que papá se fue a un lugar
donde las calles están llenas de donas y la lotería
llega todos los meses como cheque,
pero también mataron el miedo con un range rover dorado,
formaron fila para comerse un pescado con propiedades curativas,
la montaron en barras y panteones,

hicieron lo impensable: la gran gira
por todo puerto rico llevando no la palabra de dios,
sino su carpintería,
para reconstruir un amor que aguante
lo torrencial.

también, transplantados y enormes,
eran murales sin pared. a lo alto,
mejorándolo todo con la risa,
asegurándome que la lucha
nos dará pan para el pan de cada día,
que existe cierta forma de olvidarnos que
llevamos tiempo en el bolsillo,
no en la muñeca.

de noche me soñaban alegre
en casa, en bata,
segura del mar
y de un monte que sigue engullendo
las rutas e inventos de los colonizadores.
       SINVERGÜENZA WITH NO NATION

                      Raquel Salas Rivera

                                            for josé, ana, carlos, and helen


i saw the best souls of my generation
swallowed by colonialism,
anesthetizing their wounds in an alcohol well
with a whirlwind of i don’t know what pending totality.
saw them talk of death with hope,
wear cemeteries as rings,
burn all the plants and killings they were promised,
occupy lands and buildings,
hate rosselló’s blue eyes,
spit in the face of that liar,
justice,

be wrong and beautiful,

hold (in) all the world’s pain between brows.

i touched their chests so they could cry
and tenderness was a minefield.

without coordination i saw them, with an embrace,
trample the defensive anthill of well-being.

i saw that, in their hands, survival was worth a rag,
that lineage doesn’t believe in itself if death skips dates.

i saw they were angels who have spent more than
500 years preparing for flight,
who don’t know if there will be heaven or trumpet.

i saw the best souls of my generation lose their generosity,
played by pain.

i saw them hang up on fema
and prep messenger pigeons using paperwork,
saw them, between exhaustions, construct roofs and end beefs,
focus on things like light, water, and burial,
wanting earth to be earth,
antigones burying with a stolen shovel.

they were volatile like countries,
dominated like countries,
beheaded like countries.

i saw the daily disappearance of solitude’s static flight.

i witnessed the rice burning,
the yagrumo flipping.

it was wrong what happened
when they were given a puzzle
and told here, pick up the rubbish
of this so-called country.

they explained to their children that their father went to a place
where the streets are full of donuts and the lottery
arrives each month like the check,
    but they also killed fear with a golden range rover,
    formed lines to eat fish with curative properties,
    lit shit in bars and pantheons.

    they did the unthinkable: the great tour
    all over puerto rico spreading not god’s word,
    but his carpentry,
    to reconstruct a love that withstands
    the torrential.

    also, transplanted and enormous,
    they were murals without wall, up above,
    making the world right with laughter,
    making sure the struggle
    gives us bread for the daily bread
    because there is a certain way of forgetting
    we keep time in the pocket,
    not on the wrist.

    at night they dreamt me into joy
    at home, in a dressing gown,
    sure of the sea
    and of a mountain that keeps swallowing
    the colonizer’s routes and inventions.


1 First published in Kweli Journal
              PUERTO RICO’S UNJUST DEBT

                               Ed Morales

When Hurricane María hit Puerto Rico in September 2017 with category 4
destruction, the island was already reeling from austerity measures,
population loss, a health care crisis, and a failing electrical infrastructure.
Because of a $72 billion debt load, plus about $50 billion in pension
obligations, Puerto Rico’s economy had been in recession for over ten years.
Schools were closing, doctors were leaving, and blackouts were an increasing
occurrence. But the storm, which hit the entire island in almost
unprecedented fashion, would take this precarious situation and accelerate
everything, as quickly as the winds stripped its signature palm and ceiba
trees.
    In the summer of 2015, Puerto Rico’s outlandishly high debt was
declared by then governor Alejandro García Padilla as “unpayable,”
prompting the US Congress to devise a law, called the Puerto Rico Oversight,
Management, and Economic Stability Act (PROMESA), to restructure it over
the coming years. Just nine months into the existence of PROMESA’s
mandated Financial Oversight and Management Board (FOMB), Hurricane
María’s devastation exacerbated the debt crisis, as well as many of the
underlying economic issues that had been afflicting the unincorporated
territory for years. The FOMB was created in 2016 through PROMESA,
which was passed by Congress with bipartisan support after the
unwillingness of Obama and congressional Democrats—with the exception
of Bernie Sanders and Robert Menéndez—to call for debt relief or debt
forgiveness. It can be argued that US politicians, who receive large
contributions from Wall Street hedge funds, were disinclined to press for debt
relief or forgiveness because it would be unfavorable to some of their main
benefactors.
    Puerto Rico’s netherworld status—not a sovereign nation, not a US state
—prevented it from using tactics like those available to Greece and
Argentina, which were able to receive loans from the IMF, to renegotiate
them, and also to adjust their currencies. Puerto Rico, in addition to having to
use the US dollar as currency, does not have access to international courts of
law and is further punished by a maritime restriction under the 1917 Jones
Act which prevents ships from docking if they were not constructed in the
United States, are not flying the US flag, and lack a certain number of US
personnel; this drives up the cost of several consumer items.
    Both the creation of the debt and the inadequate response to the hurricane
could be seen as products of (1) the United States colonial and racist
treatment of Puerto Rico and its other territorial possessions, which set them
up to be exploited economically and denied the full rights of US citizens, and
(2) the willful neglect of collaborators among Puerto Rican economic and
governmental elites, who conspired with deregulated Wall Street banks and
institutions to create financial instruments that would delay payment by
borrowing more money and accrue higher interest rates in the long run. These
same elites offered little resistance to the Trump administration’s policy of
neglect, from helping to cover up the number of dead caused by the storm, to
an appalling lack of criticism of sluggish efforts from FEMA and inadequate
appropriation of emergency funds, until almost a year after the storm, when it
was too late to mitigate much of the physical and emotional toll.


                       WHAT CAUSED THE DEBT

Puerto Rico’s massive debt was caused primarily by its colonial relationship
with the United States, which, by refusing to consider its incorporation as a
state after acquiring it as war booty after the 1898 war with Spain, used it as a
laboratory for the excesses of unfettered capitalism. Following a pattern of
indebting or speculating on the debt of several Caribbean island nations,
including Cuba, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico was
established as a place where US corporations could set up shop without being
taxed. Because the island had no national sovereignty, it was restricted from
making trade pacts with neighbors, unable to develop a national economy
that repatriated profits, and forced to go into deep debt in the form of bond
issuances that were needed just to maintain operating expenses for
governmental agencies and essential services.
    While borrowing actually began in earnest the 1970s in the wake of that
decade’s OPEC-induced recession, it exploded in the 2000s as the island
commonwealth—more aptly described as an unincorporated territory—was
thrown into recession because of the phasing out of tax breaks to US
corporations under section 936 of the US Internal Revenue Code. The
neoliberal reaction to FDR’s welfare state—fostered by the Clinton
presidency—had enabled the deregulation of the financial sector, unleashing
massive Wall Street speculation, the creation of financial instruments that
bundled risky debts to be bought and sold, and unscrupulous behavior by big
banks and financial institutions, which restructured debts and charged
exorbitant underwriting fees. These actions caused Puerto Rico’s debt load to
increase sevenfold from the year 2000 to present; it has sold $61 billion in
bonds to Wall Street since 2006, the final year of the section 936 tax breaks.
    After the municipal bond market took off in the late 1990s, investors in
Puerto Rican government debt were a mixed bag, including mutual funds like
Oppenheimer Funds and Franklin Templeton. But since Puerto Rico’s bonds
were devalued to junk status in 2014, a growing presence of hedge funds
emerged. These speculative investments avoided regulatory oversight and
were solely motivated by the opportunity for windfall profit, hoping to
capitalize on distressed economies like Puerto Rico’s.
    As the crisis grew in scope, Franklin Templeton and Oppenheimer Funds
successfully challenged García Padilla’s 2015 attempt to legislate Puerto
Rico’s right to a debt restructuring that would resemble bankruptcy. That
legal test encouraged more hedge funds and their more speculative cousins,
vulture funds, to hold increasing amounts of up to 50 percent of the island’s
debt. This tendency was signaled in March 2014, when Barclays brokered a
municipal bond issue of an unprecedented $3.5 billion by the island’s
Government Development Bank.
    Vulture funds, hedge funds’ more extreme counterparts, target debt that is
distressed or in danger of default in troubled economies, hoping to cash in on
settlements after buying the debt for pennies on the dollar. They work to gain
leverage in the debt restructuring process by insisting on repayment at full
face value. Given Puerto Rico’s recent history of privatizing its airport and
highway toll collection system, it was already vulnerable to further sell-offs
—even its prized university system—as concessions to the vultures. As
Puerto Rico’s debt became more distressed, vulture funds bought up billions
of dollars’ worth of bonds at reduced prices, betting on recouping them
through legal actions in courts that did not allow Puerto Rico full bankruptcy
protection.
    In 2016 two investigative efforts, one by an activist group called the
Hedge Clippers and another by Puerto Rico’s Center for Investigative
Journalism (CIJPR), tried to methodically identify the hedge- and vulture-
fund owners of the debt. Among them are BlueMountain Capital and Stone
Lion Capital, which includes Paul Tudor Jones, who founded the Robin Hood
Foundation, a nonprofit founded by Wall Street high-rollers that uses
philanthropic solutions to fight urban poverty. Many of these hedge fund
operators have also been targeted by activists because of their ties to New
York governor Andrew Cuomo and their influence on pro-landlord and pro-
charter-school legislation.
    Another salient figure is John Paulson, who has not only bought $120
million in bonds but also invested in the island’s largest bank and several
major hotel properties. In 2014, along with Alberto Bacó Bagué, García
Padilla’s secretary of economic development and commerce, Paulson pitched
Puerto Rico as a tax haven for renegade billionaires, saying it can become the
“Singapore of the Caribbean.”
    Under the previous administration of Governor Luis Fortuño—a fiscal
conservative who was in office from 2009 to 2013 and who cut government
jobs and attacked unions—the Puerto Rico legislature passed two laws, the
Export Services Act and the Individual Investors Act, also known as Law 20
and Law 22. The first law gave hedge fund managers a flat 4 percent tax rate
as an incentive to move operations to Puerto Rico, while the second offered
investors complete tax exemptions on dividends, interest, and capital gains,
provided the investor lived on the island for half the year. García Padilla’s
more moderate administration had embraced this policy in a desperate
attempt to maintain outside investor interest.
    The CIJPR’s list featured a chart that illustrated how many of these hedge
and vulture funds also had a hunger for investments in troubled places like
Greece, Argentina, and Detroit, which famously declared bankruptcy in 2013.
Three funds, Aurelius Capital, Monarch Alternative Capital, and Canyon
Capital, have been involved in all four, (including Puerto Rico) while Fir
Tree Partners and Marathon Asset Management, among others, hold a trifecta
of Puerto Rico, Greece, and Argentina. Paulson had also invested heavily in
Greek banks.
    The disingenuous smoke-and-mirrors tactics of many of these hedge and
vulture funds should make their legal claims ethically and morally dubious,
but such considerations count for little in the high-stakes face-off of debt
restructuring as overseen by court proceedings mandated by Title III of the
PROMESA law. For instance, Double Line Capital’s Jeffrey Gundlach had
more than doubled his holdings of junk-rated bonds in May 2015. In an
interview with Bloomberg News, Gundlach said he compared the investment
potential in Puerto Rico’s debt to US mortgage markets in 2008, evoking the
perfect-storm conditions that helped set off the Great Recession.1


                         PRELUDE TO LA JUNTA

By the summer of 2015, the García Padilla administration had commissioned
a report from Barbara Krueger, an economist who had previously overseen
the IMF’s response to debt crises in Argentina and Greece. She was hired by
the commonwealth’s government to produce her report with two other IMF
functionaries, sending mixed messages about how to be “fair” while
“balancing” the concerns of wealthy investors with everyday citizens who are
stuck on the wrong side of the balance sheet, doomed to an ongoing global
project of exclusion and increasing inequality.
    At a hearing held that summer at Citigroup headquarters in New York,
Krueger launched into a frenetic PowerPoint presentation highlighting her
supply-side suggestions for economic restructuring. “Puerto Rico’s minimum
wage, at $7.25 an hour, is 88 percent of its median wage,” she said clinically
(in fact, her own report, as well as the Bureau of Labor Statistics, put the
figure at 77 percent). “Most economists conclude that half that amount would
be beneficial.” One major problem for the island, according to Krueger, is
that it is competing with neighboring Caribbean islands, whose wage scales
are lower than Puerto Rico’s, which is set by US minimum-wage law. She
also suggested that Puerto Rico’s welfare payments are “very generous
relative to per capita income,” causing a disincentive to work for minimum
wage. This ignores the fact that, as the pro-statehood party correctly argues,
such payments are capped at levels significantly lower than what residents
would receive if Puerto Rico were a state; the island’s lack of full entitlement
is one reason Puerto Ricans are second-class citizens.
    These assessments lay bare the fading promise that lies within Puerto
Rico’s status as an unincorporated star in the US safety-net orbit. In a way,
the federal entitlements provided to Puerto Ricans were part of the bargain to
offset their watered-down citizenship, at least during the postwar boom years.
But now that neoliberal free-trade models reigned amid a Great Recession
still weighing significantly on the mainland, the United States could no
longer afford to prop up the island’s living standards and had to defer to its
deregulated banking system’s needs, which are to place the island in its
“proper” Caribbean context, adjusting the wages of the average labor to that
of its surrounding islands and the rest of Latin America.
     All this was setting the stage for the establishment of the FOMB, which
would be put into place as the latest of a series of financial control boards that
had been employed in the United States since the late nineteenth century.
Perhaps the most famous of these was the one imposed on New York City in
the mid-1970s after President Gerald R. Ford refused federal funds to bail the
city out of its fiscal crisis, but more recently Washington, DC, Philadelphia,
and Detroit had been sites for this sort of supervision.
     Puerto Rico differs from these cities politically and economically,
however, because the island lacks voting representation in Congress as well
as voting rights in presidential elections, so it is financially compromised to
begin with—having gone through ten years of recession but having none of
the recuperative ability to draw investment as do those US cities. The FOMB
in Puerto Rico was going to be less of a way for Puerto Rico to get back on
its feet, as advertised in Washington and San Juan, and more in the way of
negotiating higher returns to vulture fund investors.
     Many of these funds are now organized into the Government
Development Bank Ad Hoc Group (hereafter Ad Hoc Group), a coalition of
vulture funds with $4.5 billion in Puerto Rico’s Government Development
Bank bonds, and the so-called PREPA Group, which holds the debt of
PREPA, the government electrical utility company. The lists compiled by
Hedge Clippers and the CIJPR were based on reports in the business press
and were confirmed by accessing public records and in some cases verifying
with the hedge funds themselves, but they are not definitive. At the time the
CIJPR filed a lawsuit in a San Juan court against García Padilla and
Government Development Bank chair Melba Acosta to force them to disclose
the list of hedge funds that hold the bonds, the members of the Ad Hoc Group
who has been meeting with her and other public officials, and the written
conditions for renegotiating payment terms as well as future bond sales.
     That summer the CIJPR published a bombshell article that disclosed that
hedge- and vulture-fund representatives “visit the offices of legislators at the
Capitol constantly.”2 According to the report, they had sometimes been
accompanied by lobbyists like pro-statehood party members Kenneth
McClintock and Roberto Prats, who also happened to be a major Democratic
fund-raising bundler and at the time chair of the Democratic Party in Puerto
Rico. Yet the article’s sources for these revelations, commonwealth party
senator Ramón Luis Nieves and Melba Acosta, for the most part, claimed to
not remember or know the names of the hedge funds or their representatives.
     “[Acosta] was not even concerned about vulture funds and hedge funds,”
said Carla Minet, one of the coauthors of the article. “She was more worried
about Oppenheimer and the mutual funds.” The judge hearing the lawsuit
found that some of the CIJPR’s requests for information were valid and
instructed them to re-petition the Government Development Bank with a
specific request for a list of bondholders and the amounts owed.
     Several reports written about the accumulation debt, by groups like the
Action Center on Race and the Economy, as well as one commissioned
(though severely underfunded) by García Padilla’s government, have pointed
out that the accumulation of the $72 billion debt involved illegal and
extraconstitutional practices.3 From the “payday loan” structure of what are
called capital appreciation bonds, which resemble the adjustable-rate
mortgages that helped cause the 2008 financial crisis, to the massive fees
charged by banks like Goldman Sachs to underwrite new loans, Puerto Rico
was exploited because of its “foreign in a domestic sense” status. Its triple-tax
exemption and its lack of ability to declare bankruptcy emboldened investors
because they would likely win in court when they brought their cases.
     That summer there had been a growing movement in Puerto Rico to carry
out a citizens’ debt audit, but the point of PROMESA seems to have been all
along to avoid a serious one. A report issued by FOMB in 2018 identified
many of the reasons for the accumulation of the debt but did not ask hard
questions of anyone involved in the deals that created it.4 Another factor
must surely be the intertwining of Wall Street interests with the governmental
elites in both Washington and San Juan. One case in point is hedge fund
speculator Marc Lasry.
    Lasry is perhaps more famous at the moment as the co-owner of the
NBA’s Milwaukee Bucks, a development that was so energizing for
Wisconsin governor Scott Walker that he signed a bill in 2015 subsidizing a
new arena for the team that, according to the New York Times, would “cost
the public twice as much as originally projected.”5 But it turns out that
Avenue Capital was one of the vulture funds that owned some of Puerto Rico
debt and was aligned with Candlewood Investment Group, Fir Tree Partners,
and Perry Corp, as part of the Ad Hoc Group.
    In 2017 the Ad Hoc Group hired the law firm Davis, Polk & Wardwell to
represent it in PROMESA’s Title III process, hoping to recoup its investment
and avoid either the government’s debt-restructuring proposals or a move by
Congress to change federal law to allow the commonwealth/unincorporated
territory/colony to declare bankruptcy. Ironically, this is the same law firm
that helped orchestrate the US government’s bailout of AIG, the bad-
mortgage debt-swapping machine at the center of the 2008 recession. So, the
same law firm that pushed for the AIG bailout was gearing up to force Puerto
Rico to pay up, while Obama, who also favored the AIG bailout, had agreed
that PROMESA represented Puerto Rico’s best hope.
    Lasry was perhaps the kind of benefactor—someone who raised $500,000
for Obama’s last campaign—whom Obama and the Democrats might have
thought they should keep happy. After all, Lasry was Obama’s choice for
ambassador to France in 2013, but unfortunately “had to remove his name
from consideration after a close friend was named in a federal indictment for
playing in a poker ring with alleged ties to the Russian mafia.” In May 2016,
Lasry threw a $2,700-a-head fundraiser for Hillary Clinton, while assuring
Bloomberg TV viewers that she is “moving a little bit to the left.”6
    Lasry’s ties to big Democratic politics had gone back many years. A
March 2010 feature in the Wall Street Journal described him lunching with
then White House chief of staff Rahm Emanuel, in part to advise Emanuel on
whether banks would resume lending again in the wake of the 2008 crisis.7
According to a 2012 New York Times article, “About 50 people paid $40,000
each to crowd into an art-filled room” in Lasry’s apartment to hear Obama
and Bill Clinton speak.8 Last decade, Lasry’s Avenue Capital even famously
employed Chelsea Clinton, whose husband had more recently flopped in
making bad investments in Greece while heading his own hedge fund.
    Lasry, who was once a humble UPS driver and whose parents convinced
him to go to law school, was apparently a gambler at heart, capable of rolling
the dice with anyone in the global Wall Street hedge-fund casino dice game
—as well as actual casino owners, like then Republican candidate and now
President Donald Trump. This partnership, which stretches back to Trump’s
Atlantic City casino bankruptcy in 2009, eventually resulted in Lasry buying
him out and becoming the chairman of Trump Entertainment Resorts in 2011,
a post Lasry eventually resigned. The stories about Lasry in the business
press described him as the “don’t call him that” vulture-fund investor; the
optimistic gambler who “bets” on economies like those of Spain or Greece to
“recover,” and then profits from that. A 2012 Bloomberg story described a
regular poker game he had with other hedge-fund managers; one colleague
assessed him as “good at figuring out what the odds are. He’s willing to take
moderate risk.”9
    It was hard to believe that someone worth $1.87 billion, according to a
2016 Forbes estimate—presumably an indication of good business sense—
would believe that economies that are in a “death spiral” would miraculously
recover. It’s more likely that rather than believing in a Puerto Rican economy
that had shown no signs of growth for so long, and whose economy was
largely driven by government employment, Lasry bet that its inability to
declare bankruptcy would yield a higher return once it defaulted. Avenue
Capital was one of many vultures that began hovering over Puerto Rico in
late 2013, when its junk-leaning bonds caused credit analyst Richard Larkin
to say of the vultures, “They can smell the blood and the fear.”10
    A, July 19, 2016, Wall Street Journal article on the Puerto Rico crisis
provided a possible explanation for his interest in pushing back against
bankruptcy or a debt restructuring that would give relief to Puerto Rico and
its people: low default rates in corporate debt had led such distressed-debt
specialists to instead focus on cash-strapped governments like Greece,
Argentina, and Puerto Rico.11 But while prices of Greek and Argentine
bonds bottomed out at less than 20 cents on the dollar at the height of their
debt crises, much of Puerto Rico’s debt still trades between 50 and 70 cents,
according to MSRB (Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board) data. That
meant if the hedge funds are to turn a profit, they would need to recover more
in a Puerto Rico restructuring than speculators in the Greek and Argentine
defaults did.
     If turning that profit entails austerity measures like lowering wages and
cutting pensions and laying people off, thus pushing toward a human rights
catastrophe—well, a smart investor has to get those 50 to 70 cents on the
dollar somehow. It remains to be seen whether Obama really had Lasry’s
back in his capitulation to the PROMESA process. But one thing was clear: if
investors had their way, a chunk of the money the Puerto Rican people would
be paying back might be owed to an unrepentant gambler who had a
privileged, back-door channel to the White House.
     As the Title III process played out in Judge Laura Taylor Swain’s
pseudobankruptcy court in San Juan, more and more of Puerto Rico’s current
and potential holdings were being sold off to satisfy bondholders. Some of
these bondholders are modest investors—including many Puerto Rican
citizens themselves—but they would wind up losers in the settlements
approved by Swain’s court in February 2019. The bulk of the profit was
assigned to hedge and vulture funds, the entities enabled by decades of
deregulation and with the complicity of Democrats, Republicans, and their
collaborators in San Juan. The COFINA settlement, which restructured $17.6
billion of the debt, used the same bond-swap or maturation-delaying capital
appreciation devices as the ones used in the massive emissions of the mid-
2010s.
     Puerto Rico’s dubious territorial status, not sovereign enough to negotiate
with a global entity like the IMF, unable to access a true bankruptcy
proceeding, has made it a captive for decades of austerity and severe
exploitation. This is why a true accounting of the debt is necessary if only to
attain the moral high ground to force reform of the colonial PROMESA
process. Yet the debt crisis itself has been used to stigmatize Puerto Rico as
an unworthy candidate for direct US aid, with Medicare benefits and food aid
for the poor being sharply cut or threatened with elimination by the Trump
administration. The portrayal of Puerto Rico as an indebted territory located
in the languid tropics feeds into the same sort of stereotypes that vilified
“welfare queens” and “super-predators.” Trump’s famous declaration on
Twitter in October 2018 that Puerto Rico did not deserve further funding
because of “inept leaders” trying to use recovery funds to pay off the debt not
only is untrue but also displays a profound misunderstanding of how the
austerity policies being imposed by the FOMB are designed to make Puerto
Rico residents pay an inflated price for their government’s debt for the next
forty years. In the current atmosphere of scapegoating and vilifying various
marginalized groups—from African Americans to women to LGBTQ
communities, on the basis of their racial and gender-based “difference”—the
attacks on Puerto Rico will no doubt continue, and their “unworthiness” to
receive as much recovery aid as Texas and Florida did after their storm crises
will continue to be explained through depicting them as fiscally irresponsible
second-class citizens, made invisible by over a century of myopic, insidious
neglect.12
1. Mary Childs and Kelly Bit, “Gundlach Sees Puerto Rico Like Mortgages in 2008
    Crisis,” Bloomberg, May 4, 2015.
2. Joel Cintrón Arbasetti, “Funcionarios se lavan las manos tras autorizar deuda que
    podría ser illegal” Centro de Periodismo Investigativo, June 14, 2016,
    http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2016/06/funcionarios-se-lavan-las-manos-tras-
    autorizar-deuda-que-podria-ser-ilegal/.
3. Carrie Sloan and Saqib Bhatti, “Wall Street’s Power Grab in Puerto Rico,” Action
    Center on Race and the Economy, May 25, 2017; Saqib Bhatti and Carrie Sloan,
    “Goldman’s Strong Man in Puerto Rico,” Action Center on Race and the Economy,
    April 28, 2017; Carrie Sloan and Saqib Bhatti, “Puerto Rico’s Payday Loans,” ReFund
    America Project, June 30, 2016.
4. The Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico Independent
    Investigator “Final Investigative Report,” Kobre & Kim LLP, August 20, 2018.
5. Michael Powell, “Bucks Owners Win at Wisconsin’s Expense,” New York Times,
    August 14, 2015.
6. Annie Karni, “Clinton Adds Fundraisers,” Politico, May 4, 2015; “Marc Lasry: Hillary
    Clinton Is Moving a Little Bit to the Left,” With All Due Respect, May 19, 2015,
    https://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/2015-05-19/marc-lasry-hillary-is-moving-a-
    little-bit-to-the-left https://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/2015-05-19/marc-lasry-
    hillary-is-moving-a-little-bit-to-the-left
7. Mike Spector, “Avenue Capital’s Investor in Chief,” Wall Street Journal, March 27,
    2010.
8. Jackie Calmes, “Clinton Supports Obama at New York Fundraisers,” New York Times,
    June 4, 2012.
9. Gillian Wee, “Lasry Sees Europe Bankruptcy Bonanza as Bad Debts Obscure Assets,”
    Bloomberg, February 14, 2012.
10. Michael Corkery and Matt Wirtz, “Hedge Funds Are Muscling Into Munis: Sharp-
    Elbowed Investors See Potential in the Stodgy World of Municipal Debt,” Wall Street
    Journal, November 11, 2013
11. Matt Wirz and Aaron Kuriloff, “Mutual Funds Are Front and Center in Puerto Rico
    Talks,” Wall Street Journal, July 18, 2015.
12. This chapter was adapted from “How Hedge and Vulture Funds Have Exploited Puerto
    Rico’s Debt Crisis” and “Is an Obama Donor Tying the President’s Hands on Puerto
    Rico’s Debt Crisis?,” which appeared on July 21 and August 19, 2015, in Nation.
            PUERTO RICO’S DEBT IS ODIOUS

                     Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan

The images of Hurricane María ravaging Puerto Rico in September 2017, and
the ensuing humanitarian crisis, flooded the media for over a year and
provoked widespread outrage at government neglect, as well as empathy and
solidarity for those struggling to recover their access to basic services.
Months went by, and the electricity wasn’t restored; the health care system
was on the perpetual verge of collapse; public sources of water were being
contaminated, affecting nearly two million Puerto Ricans; and thousands
began fleeing the island en masse to access shelter, health care, and jobs. As
all this took place, the news turned a critical eye to what was impeding
recovery efforts. What most reporters and solidarity brigades found was a
crippled infrastructure that, long before the hurricane, had been broken as a
result of Puerto Rico’s $73 billion debt. The island’s main agencies
responsible for public health, safety, and sanitary services were vastly
underfunded, indebted, accused of corruption, or notorious for their
inefficiency and systemic neglect. Some of them were also billions of dollars
in debt, including the Puerto Rican Electric Power Authority, which couldn’t
afford to properly restore and maintain the electrical grid, having suffered a
fatal blow from the hurricane. The economic crisis propelled the
humanitarian crisis further into despair, while the humanitarian crisis
deepened the economic depression that had already gripped Puerto Rico.
    Indeed, there has been a crisis in Puerto Rico for years, and only recently
has it surfaced to become more visible as a result of Hurricane María and the
international community’s watchful eye on the fatal government response.
We think of the crisis as an economic one that is crippling Puerto Ricans’
ability to come out from under the island’s oppressive $73 billion debt, not
including its pension obligations. Or we think of it as a humanitarian crisis
caused by Hurricane María and exacerbated by gross negligence and
incompetence by the local and federal governments. The crisis was, however,
created long before that and has always been as urgent, and that is the crisis
of colonialism. The heart of the economic crisis is political. That is why
Puerto Rico cannot achieve a more autonomous future and sustainable
economy—even though it may have the tools to do so—without
fundamentally changing its colonial relationship with the United States and,
thus, loosening the economic stranglehold that the colonial debt has on the
island. The first step in this process is to examine the debt’s legality: How
was it acquired, and was it acquired in accordance with the law, including
Puerto Rican law? This includes examining the debt’s morality and fairness
according to the doctrine of odious debt.
    This doctrine is based on principles of equity, not necessarily black-letter
law. It recognizes that there are illegitimate debts that originate from either
odious borrowing or odious lending practices. Either way, the result is a debt
burden for a country that ends up having a destructive impact on people’s
lives, corroding human rights, and seriously diminishing social and economic
possibilities for future generations. Historically, the doctrine of odious debt
comes from the context of transitional justice, in which a government that
oppressed and subjugated its people gives way to a new era of democratic
rule, or at least an era in which new political leadership emerges, signaling an
ideological shift and change in governance. The new government then
repudiates the offensive practices that were exercised by its predecessor,
which led to the country’s indebtedness. These repressive debt practices
usually involve a dictator or authoritarian regime that borrows to finance
mechanisms of state repression often while regime members personally profit
from the borrowing. Traditionally, what is considered odious in these debt
practices is the regime itself and what it represents, but not necessarily the
series of individual transactions for every loan. In the context of Puerto Rico,
however, it is important to look at both the overall political “regime”—
including the colonial government and the federal government, which created
the conditions for a nation to borrow $73 billion—and the individual
financial transactions that banks and the government negotiated and entered
into. This is important because there have been multiple administrations, both
local and federal, as well as multiple banks and hedge funds that have
engaged in predatory lending. While the model of lending and borrowing
didn’t vary much, the amount varied by administration, resulting in
unconstitutional debt service and borrowing.
    The doctrine of odious debt raises the questions: What would be a just
result for a people overcharged for debt that is inherently not theirs, and what
is the behavior we want the law to either correct or encourage as a question of
justice? To argue that a debt is odious is to argue against paying it and to
limit a country’s general obligation to pay its debts. For a government
making the transition from an abusive, antidemocratic, and dictatorial regime
to a democratic regime in a postconflict society, discharging odious debt
means releasing the grip that international banks and other nations may have
on it, impeding the socioeconomic progress necessary for that country to shift
from having an economy dependent on corrupt practices to one that is
transparent and accountable to its people.
     There are various forms of illegitimate debt, of which odious debt is one.
Odious debt covers the spectrum of odious borrowing and lending, including
war debt, subjugated debt (discussed below), regime debt, and, in more
modern times, unsustainable debt. The principles that are central to odious
debt allow a government to break with the colonial or fraudulent bonds that
have repressed people and to declare a debt illegal and immoral, either in part
or in its totality. If a debt is claimed to be odious, investigators examine
whether it was accumulated, used, or even paid in a way that financed corrupt
or unlawful practices while either directly keeping a people under oppressive
rule or undermining their interests and needs. A people can move to cancel
the debt once an adjudicating body declares the debt unlawful or illegitimate,
or the international community recognizes it as such, creating political
pressure to hold debt negotiations.
     Ironically, this argument was first asserted by the United States against
Spain after the Spanish-American War. Having acquired the former Spanish
colonies of Cuba, Puerto Rico, the Philippines, and Guam, the United States
refused to assume Spain’s debt in Cuba, which, it argued, had been
accumulated to repress the Cuban people and to maintain Spain’s colonial
rule. Arguing that such a debt should not be passed on to a new regime (even
a new colonial regime), the United States claimed that paying Spain for
indebting Cuba would only reward brutal behavior that should be
condemned. Thus, in the Treaty of Paris the United States did not assume the
Spanish debts, nor did Cuba after securing full independence. Over a century
later, it is now one of those same colonies that asserts the very same
argument against the economic centers of power in the United States that
maintain—with the conspiratorial help of the federal Fiscal Control Board—a
perpetually subjugated nation that cannot find its way out from under an
oppressive debt.
    An odious-debt analysis looks at a few factors, the first being whether the
people in whose name the debt was accumulated benefited from the money
borrowed. Presumably, when a nation borrows money, it is to help fund its
public budget, build infrastructure, or expand services to its citizenry, whose
future generations will carry the burden of repaying the debt. But what
happens when people not only do not receive the benefits of debt but are also
forced to face a perpetual deterioration of human rights and public services,
culminating in a new austerity regime? Put simply, it is as if a mother took
out student loans in order to pay for her education. If she is a low-wage
worker, she ends up paying back those loans for twenty years at a high
interest rate because she is a “high-risk” debtor. She will eventually pay triple
the cost of her tuition to banks that pocket all that extra money, money that
she cannot use to improve her own economic standing, such as by acquiring
better housing or building her savings. Perversely, she will also have less
money to spend on her own children’s education. Her children, as a result,
essentially end up paying for their mother’s education while depriving
themselves of the same opportunities. While the mother is paying the banks
back every cent plus interest, her government uses public funds to guarantee
the bank the value of the loan to her, but it does not guarantee the mother or
her children their fundamental right to a free and quality education.
    When we look at whether the people of Puerto Rico benefited from the
debt borrowed by their government over a period of decades, we have to ask
if there was really an improvement in public services. For decades, the
economy of Puerto Rico has been in steady decline until reaching its tipping
point—an economic depression. Under the administration of Governor Luis
Fortuño (2009–13), thousands of public employees were laid off, public
services were cut, public offices were closed, and the rights of public workers
were stripped away—even as the Puerto Rican government amassed huge
amounts of debt. The debt did not improve but rather worsened the island’s
economic problems.
    A second factor that odious-debt analysis looks at is whether the lender
knew that the funds would be used for morally questionable ends. In addition
to this question, however, indebted nations are increasingly demanding a
consideration of the illegitimate contracting of debt, not just of how the loan
money will be used. In the case of Puerto Rico, the government signed
contracts that exploited the island’s impoverished economic conditions, and
these contracts were pushed, promoted, and entered into by hedge funds
(often referred to as vulture funds for their aggressive practices of buying
distressed debt and holding debtors in a type of debt bondage). These funds
continued to buy debt even after Puerto Rico’s bond rating had been lowered
to junk status. They also began to charge exorbitant interest rates, which is
precisely what institutions do when they consider the debtor high risk,
meaning they might be unable to repay the loan. These enormously high
interest rates and stringent terms of borrowing are intended to minimize the
creditor’s risk while forcing the debtor to meet impossible and expensive
obligations, which means using its public budget funds to pay interest to Wall
Street banks (think of pawnshops or payday check-cashing stores). This can
get so expensive that governments, such as the one in Puerto Rico, end up
borrowing more money just to pay the bank’s interest rates without ever
touching the principal. This type of predatory lending raises concerns about
the illegitimate contracting practices of creditors under domestic law and
equitable defenses such as unjust enrichment, in addition to an odious-debt
analysis under international law.
    This practice is called odious lending and has become part of odious-debt
analysis, using the concept of unsustainable debt. Debt is considered
unsustainable and should therefore be canceled if repayment (not accrual)
requires that governments violate human rights or deprive their citizens of
basic needs. Odious lending practices like those of many hedge funds have
been repudiated by international organizations that promote socially
responsible investment and lending, including charging fair and reasonable
interest rates, promoting transparency in financial transactions, adjusting debt
for changed circumstances that prevent the debtor from paying all or part of
what is owed, complying with labor and environmental standards, and
promoting a restructuring or debt payment plan that prioritizes the fulfillment
of human rights. The devastation caused by Hurricane María in 2017 alone
fundamentally changed the economic landscape of Puerto Rico and its
already-limited capacity to pay its debt. After being hit by the worst hurricane
in over a century, resulting in nearly five thousand deaths, hundreds of
thousands of destroyed homes and property, and a total blow to the nation’s
weakened energy grid, the priority of the island’s government must be to
provide basic services to its people, who over a year later continue to suffer
the long-lasting effects of the hurricane. Insisting on debt repayment when
the government cannot afford to update its electrical grid or establish
renewable-energy systems, or to fund public schools, higher education, and
medical facilities, is precisely the type of odious lending practice that must be
contested.
    Although former governor Alejandro García Padilla declared the debt
unpayable in 2015, there was never a call to cancel it. Instead, Puerto Rico
passed a domestic law that would have allowed the island to restructure its
debt. But the day the governor signed it, several hedge funds sued to have it
declared unconstitutional.1 They have been clear all along that they are
uninterested in negotiating to reduce the debt repayments they have always
sought, by any means necessary, including asking a court to find that the
Puerto Rican government must repay not just the principal but also the
exorbitant interest before it can fund its own public budget. Puerto Rico
asked the federal government for funds to help with its payments, as with the
Wall Street banks that received federal money after the foreclosure and
housing crisis of 2007–8. House Speaker Paul Ryan, however, publicly said
that Puerto Rico was requesting a “bailout” and emphasized that no
“American tax dollars” would be spent to help Puerto Rico. Instead, Congress
passed the law known as PROMESA as a debt-restructuring mechanism, but
that came at the cost of a federal Fiscal Control Board.
    The concept of unsustainable debt allows us to recognize that debt can be
odious in many ways and that demanding debt repayment can also break
laws, including human rights laws. When we look at what laws the
government is obligated to uphold, we are not only talking about contracts
and private rights. In fact, a government’s primary purpose is to respect,
protect, and fulfill the human rights of its citizens. Not even in times of war
can human rights be suspended, much less in moments of capitalist crisis.
The US government, as well as the government of Puerto Rico as its colonial
territory, have the duty to ensure the ongoing realization of these most basic
rights. In the hierarchy of rights and law, the vulture funds and Fiscal Control
Board are mistaken; it is not the debt contracts that have legal priority but
rather the people’s human rights, which have been guaranteed in international
law and in several instances ratified domestically. That means that any
federal funds that were allocated to Puerto Rico for disaster relief after
Hurricane María cannot enter the general stream of revenue for the island’s
budget, from which creditors will try to access them for debt service. The
United Nations independent expert on foreign debt and human rights, Juan
Pablo Bohoslavsky, has said as much: “Ensuring financial stability,
controlling public debt and reducing budget deficits are important goals, but
[they] should not be achieved at the expense of human rights. The population
cannot be held hostage to past irresponsible borrowing and lending. The
economy should serve the people, not vice versa.”2
     Demanding debt repayment also requires an in-depth understanding of
how the debt was accumulated and whether this was done lawfully.
Achieving such an understanding is perhaps the greatest barrier to the
government of Puerto Rico in arguing that the debt is odious and that it can
therefore refuse to pay it. In addition to the deep fear that the island will
never regain access to the financial markets—which the government has
relied so heavily on, leading to the island’s economic depression—there is
little to no political will to investigate and audit the debt incurred by current
and former administrations. Yet for years people in Puerto Rico have been
demanding a comprehensive audit of the debt, which would include assessing
its legality and identifying all responsible parties (both public and private).
The Frente Ciudadano por la Auditoria de la Deuda (Citizens’ Front to Audit
the Debt), a broad-based alliance of sectors across society, is leading the
demand for a forensic debt audit that would help Puerto Ricans understand
what they are being asked to pay, how the debt was used, who is responsible
for accumulating the debt, and what should be paid. Since it is the citizens of
Puerto Rico who are being left with the debt bill, even though they are not the
ones who ran up the charges, they are seeking to clarify what is theirs, if
anything. A debt audit can be just the first step in declaring debt odious and
can play an integral role in identifying any financially risky or unethical
transactions.
     Puerto Rico’s debt must be declared odious, because there is nothing
more odious than being a colony. A fundamental principle of the odious debt
doctrine is that the political context in which debt arises is a crucial factor in
determining its legitimacy. This was key to the United States’ repudiation of
Spain’s colonial debt. Debt that is accumulated to further colonization or to
maintain colonial subjects is referred to as subjugated debt. When we
consider why Puerto Rico was forced to borrow so much money with
disastrous terms and to turn to nefarious creditors and companies with long
histories of causing economic disasters, it’s because as a colony Puerto Rico
has been locked out of other markets or venues where borrowing could have
led to alternative negotiations, terms, or even trade. Debts accumulated by an
oppressive regime are automatically suspect, but what about when its subject,
a colony lacking in sovereignty and economic decision-making authority,
resorts to borrowing in order to survive? Should we presume it legitimate?
Despite the prevailing narrative that Puerto Rico should pay what it owes,
who in fact is the responsible party? If Puerto Rico cannot exercise control
over its economic future or negotiate with full autonomy, how can there be a
fair and informed negotiation?
    Puerto Rico cannot renegotiate its debt alone, nor can it seek other
sources of financing or resort to mechanisms in regional and international
forums that could have offered it better terms and conditions. On top of that,
the US Supreme Court affirmed Puerto Rico’s colonial status in 2016, days
before the passage of PROMESA, giving Congress carte blanche under its
plenary powers to draft legislation that would only deepen the political
subservience of the island to the United States’ economic interests.3 As a
result, it is the Fiscal Control Board that now governs Puerto Rico, depriving
Puerto Ricans even further of their civil and political rights. With the board’s
imposition of shattering austerity measures to further its stated goal of debt
repayment, Puerto Ricans’ social, cultural, and economic rights continue to
suffer without end, despite calls by the United Nations to give up such
misguided policies.
    Puerto Rico’s debt is odious because it perpetuates colonialism. It does so
by financing colonial regimes and propping them up for the economic
extraction in service to other nations or financial institutions. In this historical
and political moment of our global society, colonialism and the colonial
legacies of debt they create must be widely repudiated, along with the
mechanisms and structures that finance them in order to profit from their
perpetual political and economic crisis.
1. That case was appealed up to the US Supreme Court, where, in a decision written by
   Justice Clarence Thomas, the law was indeed found to be unconstitutional. See Puerto
   Rico v. Franklin California Tax-Free Tr., 136 S. Ct. 1938, 195 L. Ed. 2d 298 (2016).
2. “Puerto Rico Debt Crisis: ‘Human Rights Cannot Be Sidelined’—UN Expert Warns,”
   United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner, January 9, 2017.
3. Puerto Rico v. Sanchez Valle, 136 S. Ct. 1863, 195 L. Ed. 2d 179 (2016).
DISMANTLING PUBLIC EDUCATION IN PUERTO
                RICO1

                   Rima Brusi and Isar Godreau

Hurricane María hit Puerto Rico’s public education system hard. The island’s
K–12 schools suffered $142 million in damages, and the campuses of the
University of Puerto Rico (UPR), $133 million.2 Shortly after the storm,
students, teachers, family members, and administrators who could drive
rushed to help clear away the debris from fallen ceilings and broken
windows, and rescue libraries and equipment from water damage. María’s
effects, however, went beyond this immediate material impact. The storm
also provided a convenient excuse for accelerating and intensifying the
process of shrinking and weakening the public sector in ways that benefit
private and corporate interests, a process that had started well before the
storm appeared in weather forecasts and news reports.
    Two years before the hurricane, in 2015, Puerto Rico caught the attention
of the New York Times and other media outlets when then governor
Alejandro García Padilla publicly declared the island’s $72 billion bond debt
“unpayable” and announced that his government would seek “significant
concessions” from debt holders.3 Shortly thereafter, a report analyzing the
crisis was commissioned by the Ad Hoc Group of Puerto Rico’s General
Obligation Bondholders—composed mostly of hedge funds that had
purchased high-risk, high-interest debt on the cheap and that had lobbied
heavily against any form of bankruptcy or relief for the territory.4 The report
highlighted a series of recommendations for Puerto Rico’s government that
were explicitly built on two assumptions: (1) that Puerto Rico’s financial
woes are “fixable” because they stem not from a “debt problem” proper but
from financial mismanagement, and (2) that the governor’s proposal to
extract concessions from debtors posed significant legal and financial risks,
and that therefore Puerto Rico needed to focus on fully paying its debt. The
report, authored by three people with ties to the International Monetary Fund
and provocatively entitled For Puerto Rico, There Is a Better Way, includes
four recommendations for “fiscal reform measures,” two of which target the
public education system. One proposal called for reducing the number of
teachers in the K–12 system, the other for significantly reducing funding for
the University of Puerto Rico (from here on UPR), which the authors refer to
as a “subsidy.”
    The following year, two major events dramatically shaped Puerto Rico’s
political and fiscal situation: García Padilla lost the general election to pro-
statehood candidate Ricardo Rosselló, who ran on a platform that included a
promise to pay bondholders, and the US Congress passed the PROMESA
Law, which established a Fiscal Oversight and Management Board, a non-
elected body of seven members locally referred to as la Junta.5 La Junta has
nearly absolute powers over Puerto Rico’s finances and can overturn local
laws that may interfere with the implementation of fiscal austerity measures.
Soon after their first official meeting in Wall Street, Junta members targeted
both the public K–12 and higher education systems of Puerto Rico in ways
that closely followed the bondholders’ “recommendations” in the Better Way
report. Correspondingly, Governor Rosselló formally announced that the
school closures already underway from previous administrations were going
to intensify, with almost half the island’s schools now targeted for closing.
Following suit, the Financial Oversight and Management Board (FOB)
demanded that the university cut about a third of its overall budget.6 And so,
at the start of 2017, before Hurricane María made landfall on the southeastern
town of Yabucoa on September 20, Puerto Rico’s public K–12 schools and
eleven university campuses were already facing an uncertain future. By the
time the hurricane dealt a devastating blow to the island’s public education
infrastructure, the system was already under siege from economic policies
that disinvested in infrastructure, equipment, and teaching personnel. After
the hurricane, disaster relief efforts did not slow down this process; rather,
they accelerated the dismantling of Puerto Rico’s schools and public
university.


          “REFORMING” K–12: LA REFORMA EDUCATIVA
The process of progressively defunding public education before and after the
storm required highly paid technocrats and bureaucrats committed to
implementing the “difficult” decisions recommended by la Junta and by
PROMESA stakeholders. Rosselló had tapped Julia Keleher for the position
of secretary of education in late 2016. In the four years leading up to her
appointment, Keleher’s education consultancy firm, Keleher and Associates,
had been awarded almost $1 million in contracts to “design and implement
education reform initiatives” in Puerto Rico.7 The results of those efforts
were never described to the public, but her salary as secretary, double the size
of her predecessors’, was justified according to her “world-class skills” and
credentials.8
    After becoming secretary, and especially after the hurricane, Keleher and
her department not only accelerated the pace of school closures, citing
hurricane-triggered migration, but also, with the assistance of US Education
Secretary Betsy DeVos’s office, produced an education-reform bill explicitly
designed to increase “school choice” through charter schools and school-
voucher programs.9 Critics and activists quickly voiced their opposition. In
the Senate hearings leading up to the bill’s approval, UPR’s dean of
education testified against the widespread adoption of charter schools using
research-based arguments. He was removed from his post shortly after.10
The bill was signed into law by Rosselló a few months after Hurricane María,
in March 2018.11 Tellingly, a separate law enacted around the same time
allows for the fast-tracking of so-called church schools, celebrated by their
advocates as a way to bring together “religious freedom” and “school
choice.”12 One of these schools, formerly named after one of Puerto Rico’s
national poets, Julia de Burgos, was rented by the government to an
evangelical church for one dollar a month.13 The church turned it into a
private school, renamed it Fountain Christian Bilingual School, and, as part
of the building’s remodeling, painted over and effectively destroyed a 1966
mural by the renowned Puerto Rican artist José Torres Martinó.
    The entire incident—privatizing a public school, changing its name from
a Puerto Rican poet’s to a religious name in English, and painting over a
valuable artwork—is an apt metaphor for the transformation of the system
and evidence of Keleher’s self-admitted cultural incompetence.14 In fact, in a
move reminiscent of the actions of unelected colonial governments of the
early twentieth century (e.g., replacing Spanish with English as the language
of instruction and punishing displays of the Puerto Rican flag on school
grounds), the secretary also eliminated Puerto Rican Week from the
department’s official curriculum.15 She also recruited candidates for high-
level leadership positions from the fifty states instead of the island.16
     Government officials refer to the new law as la reforma educativa
(education reform). The name is fitting; when in the 1990s Rosselló’s father,
Pedro Rosselló, was governor, he privatized the public health system, and
both the new health system and the law that created it were called la reforma
de salud (health reform). It is hard not to read today’s education law, which
consists mainly of eliminating public schools and creating charter schools
and voucher systems, as anything other than another large-scale privatization
of the education system. The final bill is, moreover, frustratingly vague on
some key issues: charters may or may not be for-profit, vouchers may or may
not be used at religious schools, and charters and private schools may or may
not accept special-education students.
     This last point, about students with special needs, is crucial. Unlike in the
fifty states, where about 13 percent of the student body qualifies for special-
education services, in Puerto Rico 40 percent of the student population
requires them.17 But research suggests that charter schools are less likely
than traditional public schools to enroll and retain students with
disabilities.18
    According to Keleher and other government officials, the school closures
are justified because the student population was greatly reduced after the
hurricane and because the closed schools were not teaching their students
effectively. Yet the number of students had not dropped significantly at some
of the schools that were closed, and, as critics argue, closing neighborhood
schools can become a cause rather than a result of migration, since many
families live below the poverty line and lack adequate transportation.19 Some
closed schools, moreover, were actually considered “excellent” by the
department itself, and some of the schools receiving new students as a result
of the closings lack the necessary facilities to accommodate an increased
student population.20 This led to the use of containers (provided by a private
contractor paid with FEMA hurricane relief funds) to house students, which
effectively excludes some students with disabilities who require special
accommodations and the implementation of shortened or “interlocking”
schedules that shorten students’ academic activities.


     HIGHER ED “RIGHTSIZING”: REFORNA UNIVERSITARIA

A similar turn of events unfolded with public higher education. Before
Hurricane María dealt a blow to its infrastructure in 2017, the UPR system
was already facing the draconian budget cuts imposed by la Junta. Members
of la Junta were making public declarations about the need for huge cuts to
the public university’s budget as early as January 2017. The actual numbers
were a moving target: first $350 million, then $450 million, then $500
million.21 The rationale for each calculation was never made public, but the
cuts represented about a third of the system’s total budget. After more than a
year of ignoring feedback and alternative fiscal plans drafted by the
university leadership as well as student and faculty groups, la Junta imposed
its own plan in April 2018, which immediately doubled tuition, with
increases of up to 175 percent soon to come.22 The plan also unveiled a
euphemistically described “campus consolidation” that will likely close or
shrink seven campuses and dramatically reduce the student body, faculty, and
staff.23 Ironically, Puerto Rico’s government is forced, by law, to cover la
Junta’s expenses, which amounted to $31 million in just the first ten months
and are projected to reach well over $300 million over five years.24
    After the hurricane, rather than rushing to repair and strengthen this
crucial asset for Puerto Rico’s socioeconomic development, the federal and
local governments seemed intent on further damaging the island’s public
university system. In a territory with soaring poverty and unemployment
rates, la Junta has not only doubled tuition but also eliminated the waivers
traditionally offered to athletes, choir members, and other students providing
services to the university all at an institution that for over a century has been
the island’s main channel for upward mobility.25
    The size, scope, and pace of the budget cuts demanded by la Junta
increased after the hurricane and were euphemistically presented as a
“rightsizing” of nearly $550 million over the next five years.26 The federal
government did little to mitigate the difficult situation produced by the
combined effect of the hurricane and the augmented austerity measures
advocated by la Junta. In the weeks after Hurricane María, the US
Department of Education made $41 million available to support students at
colleges and universities impacted by the hurricane, of which the UPR
system received only 20 percent.27 For comparison, in 2005 institutions in
Louisiana and Mississippi were able to access $190 million after Hurricane
Katrina. Advocates criticized the design of the application process and its
forms, which made it onerous, even impossible, for UPR campuses to apply
for most funding in the midst of power outages and rebuilding efforts.28
Adding insult to injury, a considerable portion of the María relief funds were
awarded to institutions that had not been directly affected by the storm,
including private ones like New York University and even some for-profit
ones like Grand Canyon University, to host a relatively small number of
students who came from Puerto Rico and other territories or states affected by
hurricanes Irma or María.
    In addition to making few funds available to rebuild UPR, the federal
government has also gutted essential aid programs, like work-study grants,
with little explanation. In Puerto Rico, where the median annual household
income is below $20,000, these policies are particularly damaging for low-
income students who will likely have to drop courses in order to work part-
time and secure a livable income.29
    La Junta has offered no rationale for why, from the very beginning, it
targeted UPR with such drastic cuts. It is an odd decision considering that the
UPR is one of the strongest contributors to upward mobility and the local
economy and one of the public entities that has historically best managed its
own debt.30 Such a relentless handicapping of the public university’s
function and mission would seem to make little economic sense for Puerto
Rico at this historical juncture. One would expect the government to facilitate
and encourage research initiatives in all areas after Hurricane María, from the
creation of new solar technologies to the treatment of social trauma. The UPR
is a crucial center for research, generating over 70 percent of the scientific
research output on the island.31 Despite carrying heavy teaching loads with
few of the resources that faculty in the continental United States often take
for granted, UPR has a world-class faculty that includes award-winning
humanists and scientists, and has been an important site of scientific
innovation and critical thinking. While many universities in the states
struggle to increase the number of STEM degrees they produce, particularly
among Latinx students, the UPR is one of the top schools in the country
graduating STEM students at the baccalaureate and graduate levels.32 The
UPR owns and runs public hospitals, museums, theaters, and public libraries.
It prepares the best K–12 teachers on the island.33 It is a land-grant and sea-
grant institution, and as such, it owns and operates botanical gardens, offers
agricultural-extension services, and runs programs to help protect and
responsibly utilize coastal areas.
    Given the depth and range of the university’s positive impact on Puerto
Rico’s economy and society and PROMESA’s expressed goal of promoting
economic development for Puerto Rico, one would expect that la Junta would
make the UPR the last, not the first, target for austerity measures. Faculty and
students on the ground have some ideas as to why it was just the opposite.
Austerity, not economic development, has been la Junta’s focus. La Junta’s
neoliberal rationale is that moving investments from public to private hands
will have a trickle-down effect on the economy. The public university,
however, has historically been a site of resistance to such neoliberal reforms,
whose failures have been openly questioned and described by faculty experts,
students, and workers. Indeed, higher education is, generally speaking,
strongly linked to increased political participation, and a recent study carried
out in Puerto Rico by one of the coeditors of this book, Yarimar Bonilla,
found that those who attended public institutions had much higher rates of
what social scientists describe as “political knowledge” than those who
attended private institutions.34 UPR’s role as a cradle of island-wide political
movements thus poses a threat to the highly unpopular Junta. Moreover, UPR
is known for a robust student movement that has vigorously protested
colonial intervention since 1948 and spearheaded national resistance to
austerity measures in 1984, 2010, and, most recently, against la Junta itself in
2017.35 Weakening UPR and its potential for resistance would no doubt
favor a government body intent on slashing public resources.
    Furthermore, the depth and range of the university’s positive impact on
Puerto Rico’s economy and society also challenges an agenda of austerity
and disaster profiteering that, in stifling economic development, has no
interest in developing Puerto Rico’s youngest and brightest. With a plan that
does not promote economic growth but rather focuses on austerity and the
transferring of public funds to private profit, it would be a liability to have a
highly educated group among the ranks of the unemployed or minimum-
wage workers.


             FROM PUBLIC GOOD TO PRIVATE PROFIT

The attacks on UPR and the public K–12 system cannot be viewed in
isolation. We must take into account that, right after Hurricane María,
private, non–Puerto Rican firms were given large contracts to carry out the
process of rebuilding—often with disastrous results.36 Now plans are
underway to sell Puerto Rico’s electric utility as the government invites
hedge funds and bankers associated with the blockchain industry to invest in
Puerto Rico.37 Protected areas of high ecological value are also being
targeted for sale, and a portion of the public-education budget will be
funneled into the coffers of private and charter schools.38 These
transformations need to be understood as part of a broad, violent takeover of
disaster capitalism, in which those who stand to profit from Puerto Rico’s
tragedy have been gifted by not one but two disasters: Puerto Rico’s
unpayable debt (around $72 billion in bonds and $50 billion in pension
obligations), and Hurricanes Irma and María, with estimated damages of $90
billion ($133 million for the university) and a death toll in the thousands.39
    How will disaster capitalism play out for public schools and college
campuses? Some of the implications are quite predictable. On an island
where over 40 percent of the population and over 50 percent of children live
under the poverty line, the students affected most by these cuts are precisely
the ones with the greatest need.40 This is not only because of the potential
exclusion of special education students from charter schools or a spiked
university tuition, but also because some of the closed schools and smaller
campuses targeted for closure largely serve low-income, place-bound
students in poorer municipalities. These students are likely to drop out,
migrate, or be absorbed by the US mainland’s charter or for-profit college
industry, which already markets heavily to them—with some of the very
same actors and substandard results.
     In higher education, for-profit companies are, unsurprisingly, lobbying
heavily and successfully for decreased regulation and more freedom from
public scrutiny, and institutions serving Puerto Rican students are no
exception.41 A large, nominally nonprofit system on the island is expanding
its for-profit arm, targeting Puerto Rican students who have moved to
Florida, and for-profit colleges are vying for a contract to take over Puerto
Rico’s police academy.42 In this context, it is very telling that Puerto Rico’s
only (and nonvoting) representative in the House, Resident Commissioner
Jennifer González, recently submitted a bill designed to relax the regulations
on for-profit higher-education institutions in Puerto Rico.43 Specifically, the
bill seeks to increase these colleges’ access to public funding. González has
not used her position in Washington to advocate for the public university,
even though it graduates the most students on the island, has a better record
of gainful employment for alumni than its private counterparts, and has a
better and greater impact than them on the economy.
     Most ironically, some of the actors that stand to benefit from the
privatization of Puerto Rico’s educational institutions are closely connected
to holders of Puerto Rico’s bond debt. This is the case, for example, of
Apollo Education Group, the corporation behind the University of Phoenix,
which is partly owned by Apollo Global Management, a bondholder in
Puerto Rico’s debt.44 Similarly, Canyon Capital and Stone Lion Capital, two
of the main holders of Puerto Rico’s bond debt, have strong links with the
charter school industry.45
    The dangers faced by students at for-profits in Puerto Rico are the same
as those that have been described in the fifty states. With few exceptions, for-
profits have dismal graduation rates and offer low-quality degrees. Students
who attend them are often left in debt with no degree and no job.46 UPR, by
contrast, has the opposite track record: it boasts the best overall graduation
rate in Puerto Rico and has been recognized by many scholars as an engine of
social mobility that helped move previous generations out of poverty and into
middle-class status. While student advocates in the United States denounce
the fact that only about 10 percent of flagship public colleges are affordable
for low-income students, 64 percent of students at UPR’s main campus are
low income.
    Renowned economists around the world, and even the IMF itself, have
concluded that we need more, not fewer, of these examples.47 Austerity
measures cannot help broken economies and in fact do more harm than good.
The attacks on Puerto Rican public education and economic development as a
whole will further decrease upward mobility, hamper economic growth, and
increase the island’s already soaring social inequality. Indeed, austerity
measures combined with failure to promote economic development before
Hurricane María have made Puerto Rico one of the countries with the highest
Gini coefficient, a standard measure of economic inequality, ranking fifth in
the world. After the hurricane social inequality worsened, and Puerto Rico
ranked third among 101 countries overall, surpassed only by Zambia and
South Africa.48
    Cutting funding to the public education system spurs the growth of
private and for-profit institutions and reduces access to affordable educational
opportunities, exacerbating the negative effects of María and increasing the
island’s already out of control inequality. In this context, Puerto Rico’s
colonial condition and its concomitant lack of sovereign powers facilitate not
only the payment of a dubious debt to the detriment of social services but
also profit-making for powerful and extraneous economic actors, some of
which are also debt holders, all at the expense of people’s right to access
quality education and improve their life chances. Marginalizing those who
raise their voices against these failed strategies and defunding the public
institutions that promote this awareness might quell political resistance to
austerity temporarily, in the aftershocks of the hurricane. But the rush to
implement this failed script in Puerto Rico, and to let it guide policy,
especially in the delicate and important realm of public education, will surely
lead to more inequality, increased unrest, and resistance. For students, their
struggling families, and other vulnerable groups, this man-made storm started
long ago and shows no signs of stopping.
1. Some of the content of this chapter has previously appeared in the Nation and 80
    Grados.
2. Kyra Gurney, “Kids Are Back in School in Puerto Rico. But Hurricane María’s Effects
    Still      Linger,”      Tampa        Bay      Times,       August      14,      2018,
    https://www.tampabay.com/news/education/Kids-are-back-in-school-in-Puerto-Rico-
    But-Hurricane-Maria-s-effects-still-linger_170882206; Claire Cleveland, “Without
    Researchers or Funds, Puerto Rico Universities Grapple with Future after Hurricane
    María,”            Cronkite           News,           May            4,          2018,
    https://cronkitenews.azpbs.org/2018/05/04/puerto-rico-universities-grapple-with-
    future-after-hurricane-Maria/.
3. Michael Corkery and Mary Williams Walsh, “Puerto Rico’s Governor Says Island’s
    Debts Are ‘Not Payable,’” New York Times,                         June    28,    2015,
    https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/29/business/dealbook/puerto-ricos-governor-says-
    islands-debts-are-not-payable.html.
4. Sheeraz Raza, “For Puerto Rico, There Is a Better Way,” ValueWalk, July 27, 2015,
    https://www.valuewalk.com/2015/07/for-puerto-rico-there-is-a-better-way/.
5. Joanisabel González, “Ricardo Rosselló buscará pagar la deuda del País,” El Nuevo
    Día,                       August                       14,                      2016,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/negocios/economia/nota/ricardorossellobuscarapagarladeudadelpais-
    2230317/; Susan Cornwell and Nick Brown, “Puerto Rico Oversight Board
    Appointed,” Reuters, August 31, 2016, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-puertorico-
    debt-board-idUSKCN11628X.
6. Rima Brusi, Yarimar Bonilla, and Isar Godreau, “When Disaster Capitalism Comes for
    the     University    of    Puerto     Rico,”   Nation,     September     20,    2018,
    https://www.thenation.com/article/when-disaster-capitalism-comes-for-the-university-
    of-puerto-rico/.
7. Kelia López Alicea, “A Defense for Keleher’s Contract,” El Nuevo Día, February 15,
    2017, https://www.elnuevodia.com/english/english/nota/adefenseforkeleherscontract-
    2291546/.
8. Metro Puerto Rico, “Rosselló afirma que Julia Keleher es una profesional de calibre
    ‘global,’” March 8, 2018, https://www.metro.pr/pr/noticias/2018/03/08/rossello-
    afirma-julia-keleher-una-profesional-calibre-global.html.
9. Ley de Reforma Educativa de Puerto Rico, PR.gov, March 29, 2018,
    http://www2.pr.gov/ogp/BVirtual/LeyesOrganicas/pdf/85–2018.pdf.
10. Laura M. Quintero, “Sacan al decano de la Facultad de Educación,” El Vocero,
    October 3, 2018, https://www.elvocero.com/educacion/sacan-al-decano-de-la-facultad-
    de-educaci-n/article_988c10f8-2405-11e8-a9b9-a3a33b30498a.html.
11. Daniel Rivera Vargas, “Rosselló convierte en ley la reforma educativa,” Primera Hora,
    March           29,         2018,        https://www.primerahora.com/noticias/gobierno-
    politica/nota/rosselloconvierteenleylareformaeducativa-1275122/.
12. Índice, “Firma ley que exime Iglesias Escuela de regulación estatal,” June 7, 2017,
    http://www.indicepr.com/noticias/2017/06/07/news/70913/firma-ley-que-exime-
    iglesias-escuela-de-regulacion-estatal/.
13. NotiCel, “Nueva escuela de Font ‘destruye’ obra de arte,” April 12, 2018,
    https://www.noticel.com/ahora/educacion/nueva-escuela-de-font-borra-obra-de-
    arte/728692114.
14. NotiCel, “Keleher discute con maestros durante taller de capacitación,” March 9, 2018,
    https://www.noticel.com/ahora/educacion/keleher-discute-con-maestros-durante-taller-
    de-capacitacin/713826409.
15. Ayala César and Rafael Bernabe, Puerto Rico in the American Century (Chapel Hill:
    University of North Carolina Press, 2007); Félix Cruz, “Keleher elimina la Semana de
    la      Puertorriqueñidad,”       El     Post     Antillano,    August      2,    2017,
    http://elpostantillano.net/cultura/19903–2017–08–02–17–08–12.html.
16. There is much scholarship on this topic. See, for example, Jorge R. Schmidt, The
    Politics of English in Puerto Rico’s Public Schools (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner,
    2014).
17. National Center for Education Statistics, “Children and Youth with Disabilities,” April
    2018, https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cgg.asp; Agencia EFE, “Se
    cuadruplican estudiantes de educación especial en Puerto Rico en 10 años,” Primera
    Hora,                        December                       15,                   2015,
    https://www.primerahora.com/noticias/mundo/nota/secuadruplicanestudiantesdeeducacionespecialenp
    1126676/.
18. Mary Bailey Estes, “Choice for All? Charter Schools and Students with Special
    Needs,” Journal of Special Education 37 (2004): 257–67.
19. TeleSur, “¿Por que el Gobierno de Puerto Rico cerrará 300 escuelas?,” February 16,
    2018,             https://www.telesurtv.net/news/cierran-escuelas-puerto-rico-20180216-
    0040.html; Nydia Bauza, “Fuerte oposición a la clausura de escuelas,” Primera Hora,
    April          8,          2018,         https://www.primerahora.com/noticias/gobierno-
    politica/nota/fuerteoposicionalaclausuradeescuelas-1276720/.
20. Laura M. Quintero, “En lista de cierre 56 escuelas de excelencia,” El Vocero, April 14,
    2018; El Nuevo Día, “Educación comienza a instalar vagones en los que se dara clases
    en             las            escuelas,”           August            8,           2018,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/locales/nota/educacioncomienzaainstalarvagonesenlosquesedara
    2440195/.
21. Juan Giusti Cordero, “El misterio de los $450 + millones y la UPR,” 80 Grados, June
    23, 2017, https://www.80grados.net/el-misterio-de-los-450-millones-y-la-upr/.
22. Sin Comillas, “Profesores del RUM presentan un Plan Fiscal sostenible para la UPR,”
    March 5, 2018, http://sincomillas.com/profesores-del-rum-presentan-un-plan-fiscal-
    sostenible-para-la-upr/; Kelia López Alicea, “Fiscal Blow to the UPR,” El Nuevo Día,
    April 25, 2018, https://www.elnuevodia.com/english/english/nota/fiscalblowtotheupr-
    2417518/.
23. University of Puerto Rico, “New Fiscal Plan for University of Puerto Rico,” October
    21,      2018,      http://www.upr.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Fiscal-Plan-21-oct-
    2018-.pdf.
24. Univision, “Junta de Supervision Fiscal gastó casi 31 millones de dólares en 10
    meses,” August 1, 2017, https://www.univision.com/puerto-rico/wlii/noticias/junta-de-
    control-fiscal/junta-de-supervision-fiscal-gasto-casi-31-millones-de-dolares-en-10-
    meses; Jose A. Delgado, “Junta Control Fiscal costará cientos de millones de dólares,”
    El              Nuevo             Día,             June             4,            2016,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/politica/nota/juntacontrolfiscalcostaracientosdemillonesdedolare
    2206623/.
25. Walter Díaz, “Universidad y Capital Humano: Clase Social y Logro Educativo en
    Puerto Rico,” Centro Universitario para el Acceso, University of Puerto Rico at
    Mayagüez, April (2010).
26. Keria López Alicea, “La Junta recorta 10% de los gastos de la UPR,” El Nuevo Día,
    April                                      25,                                    2018,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/locales/nota/lajuntarecorta10delosgastosdelaupr-
    2417425/.
27. Erica L. Green and Emily Cochrane, “In Devastated Puerto Rico, Universities Get Just
    a Fraction of Storm Aid,” New York Times, May 1, 2018,
    https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/01/us/politics/hurricane-maria-puerto-rico-
    emergency-aid.html.
28. Rafael Medina, “Release: CAP Submits Comments Denouncing DeVos for Ripping
    Off Puerto Rico’s IHEs; Calls on DeVos to Abandon the Form-Based Process and
    Provide Guidance in Spanish,” Center for American Progress, April 6, 2018,
    https://www.americanprogress.org/press/release/2018/04/06/449155/release-cap-
    submits-comments-denouncing-devos-ripping-off-puerto-ricos-ihes-calls-devos-
    abandon-form-based-process-provide-guidance-spanish/.
29. United States Census Bureau, “Population Estimates, July 1, 2018 (V2018),”
    https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/pr.
30. Eduardo Berrios Torres, “La verdad sobre el Plan de Retiro de la UPR,” El Nuevo Día,
    September                                     11,                                 2018,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/opinion/columnas/laverdadsobreelplanderetirodelaupr-
    columna-2446483/.
31. Jose I. Alameda-Lozada and Alfredo González-Martínez, “El impacto socioeconómico
    del sistema de la Universidad de Puerto Rico,” Occasional Papers, no. 7 (2017):
    http://www.estudiostecnicos.com/pdf/occasionalpapers/2017/OP-No-7-2017.pdf.
32. Kimberly Leonard, “Building a Latino Wave in STEM,” US News and World Report,
    May, 19, 2016, https://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2016-05-19/building-a-latino-
    wave-in-stem; Deborah A. Santiago, “Finding your Workforce: The Top 25 Institutions
    Graduating         Latinos,”     Excelencia     in      Education,      May       2012,
    https://www.edexcelencia.org/research/publications/finding-your-workforce-top-25-
    institutions-graduating-latinos.
33. María de los Angeles Ortiz, “Informe final presentado al Consejo de Educación
    Superior de PR sobre indicadores de calidad en los programas de preparación de
    maestros en cuatro IES en Puerto Rico,” Division de Investigacion y Documentacion
    sobre la Educación Superior del Consejo de Educación Superior de Puerto Rico
    (Oritz, Lord, Hope & Associates, 2006); “Ejemplares 8 programas de Preparación de
    Maestros        de     la    UPR,”      last    modified     January      18,     2017,
    https://www.metro.pr/pr/noticias/2017/01/18/ejemplares-8-programas-preparacion-
    maestros-upr.html.
34. D. Sunshine Hillygus, “The Missing Link: Exploring the Relationship between Higher
    Education and Political Engagement,” Political Behaviour 27, no. 1 (2005); Jim
    Patterson, “Education Is the Key to Promoting Political Participation: Vanderbilt Poll,”
    Research            News          @Vanderbilt,          June          25,         2012,
    https://news.vanderbilt.edu/2012/06/25/education-key-to-promoting-political-
    participation/.
35. Juan Carlos Castillo, “Las huelgas estudiantiles de la UPR, aquellas que se repiten y
    continúan (Parte 1),” Diálogo UPR, June 30, 2015, http://dialogoupr.com/las-huelgas-
    estudiantiles-de-la-upr-aquellas-que-se-repiten-y-continuan-parte-i/; Rima Brusi-Gil de
    Lamadrid, “The University of Puerto Rico: A Testing Ground for the Neoliberal State,”
    NACLA Report on the Americas, May 12, 2011, https://nacla.org/article/university-
    puerto-rico-testing-ground-neoliberal-state; Cynthia López Cabán, “La mayoría de los
    recintos de la UPR están en huelga indefinida,” El Nuevo Día, April 6, 2017,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/locales/nota/lamayoriadelosrecintosdelauprestanenhuelgaindefin
    2307616/.
36. Vann R. Newkirk II, “The Puerto Rican Power Scandal Expands,” Atlantic, November
    3, 2017, https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2017/11/puerto-rico-whitefish-
    cobra-fema-contracts/544892/; Patricia Mazzei and Agustin Armendariz, “FEMA
    Contract Called for 30 Million Meals for Puerto Ricans. 50,000 Were Delivered,” New
    York Times, February 6, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/06/us/fema-contract-
    puerto-rico.html.
37. Dawn Giel and Seema Mody, “Puerto Rico Lures Blockchain Industry to Help Fund
    Its Comeback,” CNBC, March 16, 2018, https://www.cnbc.com/2018/03/16/puerto-
    rico-lures-blockchain-industry-to-help-fund-its-comeback.html.
38. Gerardo E. Alvarado Leon, “El gobierno mercadea 17 terrenos protegidos,” El Nuevo
    Día,                         May                        10,                       2018,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/locales/nota/elgobiernomercadea17terrenosprotegidos-
    2421335/.
39. Daniel Uria, “Hurricane María Caused $90B of Damage in Puerto Rico,” UPI, April 9,
    2018,          https://www.upi.com/Hurricane-Maria-caused-90B-of-damage-in-Puerto-
    Rico/6421523309427/; Claire Cleveland, “Without Researchers or Funds, Puerto Rico
    Universities Grapple with Future after Hurricane María,” Cronkite News, May 4, 2018,
    https://cronkitenews.azpbs.org/2018/05/04/puerto-rico-universities-grapple-with-
    future-after-hurricane-Maria/.
40. United States Census Bureau, “Population Estimates, July 1, 2018 (V2018),”
    https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/pr; Bianca Faccio, “Left Behind: Poverty’s Toll on
    the Children of Puerto Rico,” Child Trends, March 28, 2016,
    https://www.childtrends.org/left-behind-povertys-toll-on-the-children-of-puerto-rico;
    Rima Brusi, Walter Díaz, and David González, “So Close and So Far: ‘Merit,’ Poverty,
    and Public Higher Education in Puerto Rico,” Revista de Ciencias Sociales, 2010,
    https://revistas.upr.edu/index.php/rcs/article/view/7470/6074.
41. Michelle Chen, “Why Are New York’s Public Funds Going to For-Profit College
    Tuition?,” Nation, April 5, 2018, https://www.thenation.com/article/why-are-new-
    yorks-public-funds-going-to-for-profit-college-tuition/.
42. Brook v. Sistema Universitario Ana G. Mendez, Inc., 8.17 (M.D. Fla. Nov. 20, 2017);
    Keila López Alicea, “Una universidad entrenaria a los futuros policias,” El Nuevo Día,
    July                                        6,                                     2018,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/seguridad/nota/unauniversidadentrenariaalosfuturospolicias-
    2433190/.
43. US Congress, House, Puerto Rico Higher Education Disaster Relief Act, HR 5850,
    115th Congress, https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/5850/text?
    format=txt.
44. Alan Mintz et al., “Hedgepapers No. 17—Hedge Fund Vultures in Puerto Rico,”
    Hedge Clippers, July 10, 2015, http://hedgeclippers.org/hedgepapers-no-17-hedge-
    fund-billionaires-in-puerto-rico/.
45. Joel Cintron Arbasetti, “La trayectoria de los fondos de cobertura que llegaron a Puerto
    Rico,”      Centro      de       Periodismo      Investigativo,    July    14,     2015,
    http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2015/07/la-trayectoria-de-los-fondos-de-cobertura-
    que-llegaron-a-puerto-rico/.
46. Mamie Lynch, Jennifer Engle, and Jose Luis Cruz, “Subprime Opportunity: The
    Unfilled Promise of For-Profit Colleges and Universities,” Education Trust, November
    22, 2010, https://edtrust.org/resource/subprime-opportunity-the-unfulfilled-promise-of-
    for-profit-colleges-and-universities/.
47. Yalixa Rivera and Jonathan Levin, “Puerto Rico’s Fiscal Plan Was Doomed Even
    before      María,      Stiglitz     Says,”    Bloomberg,       January    16,     2018,
    https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-01-16/puerto-rico-fiscal-plan-
    doomed-even-before-maria-stiglitz-says; Larry Elliott, “Austerity Policies Do More
    Harm Than Good, IMF Study Concludes,” Guardian, May 27, 2016,
    https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/27/austerity-policies-do-more-harm-
    than-good-imf-study-concludes.
48. El Nuevo Día, “Puerto Rico es el tercer país de mayor desigualdad económica del
    mundo,”                   September                   17,                    2018,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/negocios/economia/nota/puertoricoeseltercerpaisdemayordesigualdadeco
    2447734/.
  PUERTO RICO’S FIGHT FOR A CITIZEN DEBT
                  AUDIT

         A Strategy for Public Mobilization and a Fair
                        Reconstruction

                     Eva L. Prados-Rodríguez1

Puerto Rico is in pain. It is experiencing the combined force of a 120-year
colonial relationship with the United States and a fiscal and economic crisis
that has led it to accumulate over $74 billion in odious, illegitimate,
unsustainable, and potentially illegal public debt that exceeds 100 percent of
our gross national product (GNP). We are also living through a humanitarian
crisis caused by the devastation of hurricanes Irma and María, and the gross
negligence of the federal and local response to both events.
    The effects of these combined forces have been felt, for example, in the
imposition of the unelected Fiscal Control Board, in 2016, to restructure
Puerto Rico’s public debt, dismantle its public sphere, and advance an
aggressive privatization and austerity agenda.2 Also in the thousands of
people who died as a result of the country’s unpreparedness for the events of
September 20, 2017.3
     To cope with these accumulating and intersecting crises, more than
150,000 residents of Puerto Rico have organized behind the banners of
transparency and accountability,4 and have created the Citizens’ Front to
Audit the Debt (Frente Ciudadano por la Auditoría de la Deuda): a
nonpartisan and wide-ranging coalition in Puerto Rico consisting of
grassroots organizations, professional associations, labor unions,
businesspeople, academics, students, human rights defenders, and other
citizens who advocate for a comprehensive audit of Puerto Rico’s public
debt. When the Puerto Rican government eliminated a public commission
created to conduct a public audit of the debt, we created the Citizens’
Commission for the Comprehensive Audit of the Public Debt, a nonprofit
organization whose only purpose is to perform a transparent and
comprehensive citizen audit of Puerto Rico’s debt issuances for the past five
decades.5
    A comprehensive citizen debt audit would allow us to evaluate (1) how
much is really owed in principal and interest, (2) the legality and legitimacy
of each bond issuance, (3) the conduct of every involved actor and financial
institution, (4) how the money was spent, and (5) how political and economic
elements, such as colonialism and financial capitalism, played a crucial role
in the accumulation of Puerto Rico’s public debt.6 Such an audit would also
become a powerful tool toward fostering citizen involvement, participation,
and mobilization in the decision-making processes related to Puerto Rico’s
public debt and the policy measures advanced by the government and the
Fiscal Control Board to address our fiscal and economic crisis.7
    Our collective insists that it is unsustainable for the people of Puerto Rico
to pay $74 billion in debt without a complete, independent, and formal audit.
While austerity measures have been implemented in Puerto Rico for decades,
recent Fiscal Control Board intervention on behalf of unaudited creditors has
pushed for more severe budget cuts, privatizations, and the elimination and/or
reduction of workers’ benefits and pension plans.8
    Puerto Rico Law 97 of 2015 created the Commission for the
Comprehensive Audit of Puerto Rico’s Public Debt, an independent public
entity with the stated purpose of auditing all components of Puerto Rico’s
currently outstanding debt in accordance with government accounting and
legal standards for performance and compliance, among other standards, as
needed. Unfortunately, the government dragged its feet on performing such a
debt audit, first delaying the appointment of its citizen representatives, then
severely underfunding the commission,9 until the administration of Governor
Ricardo Rosselló finally disbanded the commission10 after unsuccessfully
attempting to dismiss its citizen representatives.11
    Through its preaudit reports, this commission, as well as studies
published by other organizations, uncovered a lot of issues regarding the
legality of Puerto Rico’s public debt. For example, a preaudit report
published by the commission argued that about half of Puerto Rico’s total
debt is potentially illegal and in violation of our Constitution.12
     Additionally, other published reports identified several predatory
practices by Puerto Rico’s creditors. For instance, Puerto Rico has $37.8
billion in outstanding capital appreciation bonds (CAB), accounting for a
very large share of its total outstanding debt. A CAB is a long-term bond with
compound interest on which the borrower does not make any principal or
interest payments for the first several years and, in some cases, until the final
maturity of the bond. The principal on these bonds is just $4.3 billion. The
remaining $33.5 billion is interest—that means we have loans on which we
are supposed to pay eight or nine times the amount we originally
borrowed.13 Hence, $33.5 billion of the island’s outstanding debt isn’t debt
at all but unpaid interest. This is predatory and illegitimate debt, and it should
not be paid.
     Many of the investors who now own Puerto Rico’s debt, including
vulture hedge funds, never expected the island to be able to repay all of it
because it had already been written down as bad debt—which is what
allowed these investors to buy it at steep discounts on the secondary market.
For example, several hedge funds, such as Golden Tree and Tilden Park,
started buying up Puerto Rican debt in late 2017 and early 2018, taking
advantage of low prices after Hurricane María. Before the storm, GoldenTree
owned $587 million in public debt and increased its investments after María
to $1.5 billion.14 They now seek two, three, or almost four times a return on
their investment. Creditors should not receive more than they paid. If they
bought Puerto Rico’s bonds for 14 cents on the dollar, they should not get
more than 14 cents. The Commonwealth cannot afford to give vulture hedge
funds a return on their investment if it means closing schools and slashing
public health programs.
     Despite these issues, the Fiscal Control Board, which has no interest in
conducting a comprehensive audit, is now aggressively promoting
restructuring agreements with bondholders, even after María. For instance,
some of the restructuring agreements will force the island to pay double the
principal on some loans. One example of this is the Puerto Rico Sales Tax
Financing Corporation (known by its Spanish acronym, COFINA). COFINA
is a public corporation that was created to issue government bonds and use
other finance mechanisms in order to pay back and refinance Puerto Rico’s
debt. The particularity of COFINA is that it’s main funding source is local
sales tax. At present, a large portion of Puerto Rico’s tax revenues goes
directly to a private bank account where it is used to pay bondholders.
    The COFINA agreement, tied to Puerto Rico’s sales tax, proposes that
close to $33 billion will be paid to bondholders through the maturity date of
the debt.15 But the principal—that is, the amount that the government
actually received—was only about $17 billion.16 That is not a restructuring
of the debt. That is a gift to finance capitalists, particularly hedge funds, who
bought parts of that debt for close to 10 cents on the dollar.
    Additionally, some deals, such as the one proposed for the COFINA
bondholders, make them the actual owners of Puerto Rico’s sales tax
receipts,17 and will force us to keep on paying the tax for at least forty more
years, without any of those funds going toward public services.18
    Furthermore, the island is now due to receive a large influx of relief funds
and external support to rebuild from the hurricane. This provides a real
opportunity to bolster public investment and address the lack of efficient
infrastructure that has contributed to the crisis. But as the Center for
Economic and Policy Research has recently highlighted, “The Board’s Fiscal
Plan focuses on privatizing public institutions and putting funds aside for
debt repayments, rather than using all available resources to help the island
rebuild and recover.”19
    For all the foregoing reasons, we insist on a comprehensive citizen audit
of Puerto Rico’s debt. The Citizens’ Commission—a natural successor of a
previous government-created commission—is composed of seventeen experts
and representatives in disciplines and areas impacted by Puerto Rico’s public
debt and the privatization and austerity measures advanced by its government
and the Fiscal Control Board. The Citizens’ Commission endeavors to
examine the forensic, legal, constitutional, financial, and rendering
components of debt issued by the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, including
its public corporations and retirement systems, since 1973. Thus, we are
suing the government, seeking to obtain all public records needed to conduct
such a project, including records that the government has voluntarily shared
with the Fiscal Control Board and its bondholders.
    Additionally, we are in the midst of a crowdfunding campaign, asking the
public to help finance this much-needed audit.20 In the end, our purpose is
very simple: we wish to reclaim our right to learn and tell our fiscal,
economic, and political history with regard to the accumulation of this odious
debt, as well as to empower our people and social movements to change the
power dynamics that keep our archipelago trapped by the twin evils of
finance capitalism and imperialism.
    The people before the debt, the people before austerity, a comprehensive
audit before giving one more cent to finance capitalists!
1. I would like to thank Luis José Torres-Asencio for his comments and
   recommendations on this article.
2. Puerto Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Sustainability Act (PROMESA),
   Public Law 114–87, 130 Stat. 549 (2016).
3. Omaya Sosa-Pascual, Ana Campoy, and Michael Weissenstein, “The Deaths of
   Hurricane María,” Centro de Periodismo Investigativo, September 14, 2018,
   http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2018/09/the-deaths-of-hurricane-Maria/.
4. Agustín Criollo Oquero, “100K Signatures Collected in Favor of Auditing Puerto
   Rico’s        Debt,”     Caribbean         Business,       February      21,      2017,
   https://caribbeanbusiness.com/100k-signatures-collected-for-the-audit-of-puerto-ricos-
   debt/. See also Carla M. Pérez Meléndez, “Encuesta revela apoyo a la auditoría de la
   deuda,” Diálogo UPR, April 4, 2017, http://dialogoupr.com/encuesta-revela-apoyo-la-
   auditoria-de-la-deuda/. The signatures in favor of a comprehensive audit of Puerto
   Rico’s public debt have since surpassed the 150,000 mark.
5. 80grados,      “La    auditoría    va,    pero    ciudadana,”     April    20,    2017,
   https://www.80grados.net/la-auditoria-va-pero-ciudadana/.
6. Armando J. S. Pintado, “Pausa para la Auditoría,” 80grados, March 24, 2017,
   https://www.80grados.net/pausa-para-la-auditoria/.
7. For a discussion on the importance of citizen audits as strategies for public education,
   participation, and mobilization, see María Lucia Fattorelli, Auditoría ciudadana de la
   deuda pública: Experiencias y métodos (Brasilia: Inove Editora, 2013).
8. Centro de Periodismo Investigativo, “Deuda pública, política fiscal y pobreza en
   Puerto      Rico,”    April     4,     2016,    http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/wp-
   content/uploads/2016/04/FINAL-Informe-Audiencia-Pública-PR-4-DE-ABRIL-
   2016.pdf (presented by civil society organizations to the Inter American Human Rights
   Commission); José M. Atiles-Osoria, Apuntes para abandonar el derecho: Estado de
   excepción colonial en Puerto Rico (San Juan: Editora Educación Emergente, 2016);
   Naomi Klein, The Battle for Paradise: Puerto Rico Takes on the Disaster Capitalists
   (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2018); Ricardo Cortés Chico, “La austeridad como
   receta,”         El         Nuevo          Día,          April         22,        2017,
   https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/locales/nota/laausteridadcomoreceta-2313854/;
   Roberto Pagán, “La austeridad y las reformas antiobreras no son la respuesta,”
   80grados, December 8, 2017, https://http://www.80grados.net/la-austeridad-y-las-
   reformas-antiobreras-no-son-la-respuesta/.
9. El Nuevo Día, “Pautada la primera reunión de la Comisión de Auditoría de Crédito
   Público,”                      January                      7,                    2016,
   https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/politica/nota/pautadalaprimerareuniondelacomisiondeauditoriad
   2147966/.
10. Puerto Rico Law No. 22–2017. See also Leysa Caro González, “Aprueban a viva voz
    derogar comisión que examinaría la deuda pública,” El Nuevo Día, April 18, 2017,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/locales/nota/caldeadoslosanimosenelcapitolio-
    2312117/.
11. See Pagán Rodríguez et al. v. Rosselló-Nevares, SJ2017CV00037 (Judgment of April
    6, 2017) (Puerto Rico Court of First Instance, Superior Court of San Juan) (ordering
    the restitution of the commission’s citizen representatives, previously dismissed by
    Governor Rosselló-Nevares).
12. Comisión para la Auditoría Integral del Crédito Público (CAICP), Pre-audit Survey
    Report (San Juan: CAICP, 2016), http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/wp-
    content/uploads/2016/06/Informefinal.pdf
13. Saqib Bhatti and Carrie Sloan, “Puerto Rico’s Payday Loans,” ReFund America
    Project, June 30, 2016, https://bibliotecavirtualpr.files.wordpress.com/2017/04/2016-
    2017-refund-america-debt-pr-english.pdf.
14. Abner Dennis and Kevin Connor, “The COFINA Agreement, Part 2: Profits for the
    Few,” Eyes on the Ties, November 20, 2018, https://news.littlesis.org/2018/11/20/the-
    cofina-agreement-part-2-profits-for-the-few/. The updated figures are reflected by the
    creditor’s own filings in the ongoing judicial proceeding under PROMESA; see In re:
    The Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico, No. 17 BK 3283-
    LTS.
15. Joanisabel González, “Bajo la lupa de Swain el plan de COFINA,” El Nuevo Día,
    November                                      18,                                2018,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/noticias/locales/nota/bajolalupadeswainelplandecofina-
    2460418/.
16. González, “Bajo la lupa de Swain.”
17. Dennis and Connor, “The COFINA Agreement.”
18. Dennis and Connor, “The COFINA Agreement.”
19. Lara Merling and Jake Johnston, Puerto Rico’s New Fiscal Plan: Certain Pain,
    Uncertain Gain (Washington, DC: Center for Economic and Policy Research, 2018),
    http://cepr.net/images/stories/reports/puerto-rico-fiscal-plan-2018–06.pdf.
20. To follow our crowdfunding campaign, visit http://www.auditnow.org/.
                         RHIZOMATIC

                     Ana Portnoy Brimmer

“By Porto Rican law the entire beach of the island is government
property, for sixty feet back of the water’s edge. As a consequence,
what would in our own land be the choicest residential section is
everywhere covered with squatters, who pay no rent, and patch their
miserable little shelters together out of tin cans, old boxes, bits of
driftwood, and yagua or palm-leaves, the interior walls covered, if at
all, with picked-up labels and illustrated newspapers.”
               —Harry A. Franck, Roaming through the West Indies, 1920

Mangroves now lie on the side of the road.
Cut to charred bones and left to rot

on the dirt path leading to the bay,
where people from the capital,

or from the continent, have been
building second or third homes.

As if the waterfront wasn’t home
already. Long ago, times only the salt

can claim to have clung to, these edges
of land were shunned, deemed disease-ridden,

too poor to possibly inhabit, too dark
a stretch of marginal acreage.
A blue expanse was anything but useful,
laden with reef and memory.

But our story begins here. With water.
The one constant, always calling.

They have many names for us, you see.
Squatters, informal dwellers, deedless

in square-footage. But these coasts have long
known our laborious footfall, sand swallowed

our prints and those of our ancestors,
soil seen the harvest and burn of cane

and our children. Like mangroves,
we are of an intertidal existence—

led by the comings and goings of the blue,
of brine and resolute rooting.

Our fingers are tattooed with clasp
of land crab, prying of clams and oysters,

nibble of fish and estuary waters,
sharp imprecision of machete on coconut.

This land is no one’s. This land is of itself—
the lick and lip of wave’s edge.

But it has taken us in. Made a home
of us in return. So, we too taste the pierce,
the bleeding fence—acid whispers
of private and profit. They want us gone.

Offer to repair our homes from the storm,
if only we move inland—recede, swell-like,

from the shore. Let another hurricane come.
We stand rhizomatic upon this saline earth.
       PART V
Transforming Puerto Rico
 LOOKING FOR A WAY FORWARD IN THE PAST

       Lessons from the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party

                             Mónica Jiménez

In June 2016, the US Supreme Court ruled in two important cases on the
disputed sovereignty of Puerto Rico. These decisions, though significant,
were quickly overshadowed by Congress’s passage of the Puerto Rico
Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act (the much-reviled
PROMESA), which sought to address the island’s billions of dollars of debt.
Collectively, these actions reasserted the United States’ plenary, or complete,
power over the island and reinscribed the face of US colonialism in Puerto
Rico. In the wake of the staggering debt and economic crises the island faces,
I began to ask myself what if anything we might find in the past, and
specifically in the ideas of the Partido Nacionalista de Puerto Rico
(Nationalist Party) and its leader, Pedro Albizu Campos, that might help us
understand this moment and guide us into the future.
    Then, as the world watched in horror and grief, what was already a
seemingly insurmountable problem of debt and colonialism became a
catastrophe. Hurricane María hit Puerto Rico in September 2017 and laid bare
for all to see the vulnerabilities and inequities of Puerto Rican life. The
hurricane exacerbated the many daily difficulties islanders already faced in
merely trying to live. Puerto Rico, nearly invisible to most of the world
before the hurricane, became hyper-visible in the wake of disaster, and so too
did colonialism in its twenty-first-century iteration.
    In the face of so many catastrophes and when the ideas of sovereignty and
democracy no longer hold any real value for the island, where can Puerto
Ricans find a way forward? Where can we find guidance or other ways of
thinking about potential futures? For an island that has been colonized for
over five hundred years, this is a very difficult question indeed. In light of the
island’s current obstacles, the need to think creatively seems even more
urgent, as does turning to the island’s history and thinking through what we
might glean about the way forward. What guidance might we find in the old
ideas—those that, at the time, were tossed aside as impossible, ill conceived,
retrograde, or dangerous?
    The notions of sovereignty and autonomy have a rather slippery history
for the island. Before the arrival of the United States, islanders lobbied for
greater autonomy from Spain, which they received mere months before the
US occupation of 1898. In point of fact, the island has never truly had
sovereignty, having always been held as a colony. In the mid-twentieth
century, Albizu Campos called vociferously for independence for Puerto
Rico, arguing that anything less than full sovereignty would be tantamount to
colonialism. That period was particularly fraught, as the Great Depression
and the downturn of global markets had made Puerto Rico and its export-
based economy particularly vulnerable. In the midst of increasing desperation
on the island, Puerto Ricans began to demand a change to their relationship
with the United States and an end to exploitative labor practices.
    In 1952 the creation of the Estado Libre Asociado (ELA, or the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico) seemed to respond to islanders’ calls for
change. The ELA created a local government to oversee island affairs and
allowed islanders to elect their own local officials. It operationalized the
notion of local autonomy in close association with the United States. Even
after the creation of the ELA, however, the question of whether the island had
acquired something like sovereignty loomed large. Over the past sixty years
this has been a point of debate in local political circles, but in June 2016 the
US Supreme Court gave islanders a definitive answer with its decisions in
Puerto Rico v. Sanchez Valle and Puerto Rico v. Franklin California Tax-
Free Trust, et al.1
    These two cases asked the court to rule on the limits of the island’s ability
to govern itself. Sanchez Valle asked the court to decide whether Puerto Rico
was a “separate sovereign” for purposes of the Fifth Amendment’s double-
jeopardy clause, which allows for two prosecutions to stem from the same
series of events if the prosecutions are pursued by “separate sovereigns.” In
that case the court found that the power to prosecute crimes stems from the
island’s constitution, as is true for all fifty states. But unlike the states, whose
constitutions stem from the powers granted to each by the people who reside
in them, Puerto Rico’s constitution came about from a delegation of
congressional power. As a result, the island’s power to prosecute criminals
stems from Congress, and where there is a dispute over whose power reigns
supreme, that of Congress wins out.
    Puerto Rico v. Franklin California Tax-Free Trust, et al. asked the court
to decide whether the island can pass its own bankruptcy law to address its
overwhelming debt. There, the island argued that since it is not a state, it is
not barred from passing its own bankruptcy laws. The court disagreed and
found that it was not up to Puerto Rico to decide when its indebted
governmental entities can pursue bankruptcy, as is the case with the fifty
states. Instead, it is up to Congress to decide on that matter. Together, these
two decisions reaffirmed Congress’s plenary, or complete, power over Puerto
Rico, which was established by the 1901 Supreme Court decision Downes v.
Bidwell. There, the court pointed to Article IV, Section 3 of the US
Constitution, the Territory or Property Clause, to find that Congress had
plenary power over the island and as such Congress could choose if and when
to extend the provisions of the Constitution to Puerto Rico. The court also
created the unique designation of “unincorporated territory” for Puerto Rico,
which meant that the island was outside the established legal order and could
be maintained as such until such time as Congress chose to change that
status.
    These decisions, in tandem with the passage of PROMESA and its
implementation of an unelected Fiscal Control Board to oversee the island’s
financial affairs, effectively spelled the death of the ELA and the island’s
limited self-governance. They also signaled a return to the sort of colonial
relationship that had existed before its creation. The events of 2016 would no
doubt have been unsurprising for Albizu Campos, who in many ways
predicted much of what is playing out in the island’s political and economic
sphere today. His warnings against embracing the ELA and what ELA would
actually mean for the island were quite prescient.
    When ELA was created, he urged Puerto Ricans to reject it as just another
form of colonialism but with a shinier veneer. In 1950, when islanders were
asked to vote to approve the legislation that would enact the island’s
constitution, Albizu Campos stated, “In Puerto Rico only the US has
jurisdiction … That Law [Law 600, which enacted the ELA] can be annulled
by the US Congress.”2 He went on to argue that the island’s purported
constitution would be subsumed by Congress’s power. As an attorney, Albizu
Campos understood well the limitations that Congress’s plenary power
placed on the island, and he also understood that creating a constitution for
Puerto Rico did nothing to abrogate that power. For him the constitution was
merely smoke and mirrors meant to placate Puerto Ricans without actually
changing the colonial dynamics of the island’s relationship with the United
States.
    Perhaps one of the points Albizu Campos made most vehemently was the
impossibility of democracy for Puerto Rico within a US context. Indeed, the
logic of the ELA was that there could be local democracy despite federal
plenary power. In 1933 he wrote, “In Puerto Rico there is no legislative
power.”3 In other words, although the island had institutions that mirrored
those of the federal and US state governments—a Congress on the island,
which was elected by the people and was charged with representing their
interests—they were nonetheless powerless before the veto power of the US-
appointed governor, Congress’s representative on the island. He argued that
while US plenary power existed, the people of the island could never have
true democracy. Later, supporters of the ELA and of Luis Muñoz Marín, the
island’s first democratically elected governor, would point to this election
and the island’s adoption of its own constitution to refute Albizu Campos’s
arguments.
    The Supreme Court’s 2016 decisions with respect to the origins of the
island’s power to self-govern effectively curtailed Puerto Rico’s local
democracy and reaffirmed plenary power—it also proved Albizu Campos’s
right all those years later. In 2016 the court held that the island’s Constitution
and its ability to self-govern are merely delegations of congressional power
and are thus limited. In other words, what Congress gives, Congress can take
away; when in doubt, Congress’s power supersedes that of the island
government and the people of Puerto Rico. Although the ELA allows for
local governance, how effective is local democracy if ultimately Congress
can veto island officials and assert its will in even the most local facets of
island life?
    In March 1933, while Puerto Rico was still in the process of recovering
from the catastrophic Hurricane San Ciprian, which struck the island in 1932,
Albizu Campos wrote to Rafael Martínez Nadal, the president of the Puerto
Rico Senate, urging him to adopt measures to stop the island’s payments on
its debts to US-held banks.4 Then as now, the island was in the midst of a
major financial calamity brought on by the Great Depression and two major
hurricanes. Albizu Campos’s March 7 letter came in response to President
Roosevelt’s implementation of a national bank holiday and passage of the
Emergency Banking Act of 1933 (EBA), which were intended to protect
banks from the effects of mass withdrawals as people panicked when the
economy hit bottom in the winter of 1932–33. The bank holiday and other
protections implemented by the federal government through the EBA were
intolerable to Albizu Campos, who decried the fact that those same banks had
not extended relief from mortgage or other debt payments to devastated
islanders after the back-to-back hurricanes.5
    Albizu Campos argued that the US financial system could not help but
take advantage of the vulnerabilities brought on and worsened by the
hurricanes. He warned that Puerto Ricans would be naive to look to the banks
to help the island recover from the natural disasters. For him the post–San
Ciprian moment and the possibility of government intervention to help the
banks posed a golden opportunity to consolidate power over the island’s
finances in the hands of US corporate interests. Ultimately, Albizu Campos’s
arguments about the predatory nature of the US banking system seemed to
anticipate exactly the financial debacle the island faces today. His warnings
against a system that protected big banks but not devastated citizens also
resonate in Puerto Rico’s current moment. While the world has changed
much since 1933, Albizu Campos’s fears about the consolidation of the
island’s finances in the hands of US bankers and the loss of what he called
“the island’s natural riches”— but which we might understand as its public
sector, its public lands, its res publica, or public thing—anticipated the slow-
moving train of the island’s slide into debt financing and its current
condition.
    While there might not have been much radical about what Albizu Campos
was saying about the island’s lack of legislative power or his warnings about
predatory bankers or even his declaiming the possibility of local democracy
in association with the United States, nevertheless his warnings fell on deaf
ears. Perhaps what Albizu Campos saw when he considered the island’s
relationship with the United States in the early twentieth century was actually
the future—our present. A future that seemed so unimaginable to his
contemporaries that they simply dismissed his warnings as the ravings of an
extremist, easy to ignore and dismiss.
     Albizu Campos was also adamant that the solutions to the island’s
problem of colonialism would not be solved by the United States. In fact, he
declared that “we will never arrive at being a free people if we keep asking
the US what should become of us.”6 In this I agree with him; over the past
120 years, appeals to Congress have been ineffective in resolving some of the
island’s most pressing problems. In 2016, prominent Puerto Ricans of all
stripes, including politicians, academics, and celebrities, lobbied Congress to
do something, anything, to address the island’s debt crisis. The resulting
legislation, PROMESA, was a disappointing answer to those pleas. And of
course, in September 2017, when Hurricane María hit, as all the world
watched, desperate islanders pleaded for aid from the United States and were
met with neglect, incompetence, and paper towels. Again, the US response
fell short and proved once again that when islanders seek the aid of the US
government, what they can expect in response is more colonialism.
     It has been eighty-six years since Albizu Campos wrote to Martínez
Nadal calling on him to halt Puerto Rico’s debt payments and indicting the
predatory nature of the US banking system. Eighty-six years later, Puerto
Ricans are regularly taking to the streets, to social media, and to La Fortaleza,
the Puerto Rico governor’s mansion, to demand the very things that Albizu
Campos called for in the 1930s. Albizu Campos warned us not to be lulled
into believing that the US could offer the island something other than
colonialism. Despite the intervening years, the apparent changes in Puerto
Rico’s political status, and in the face of the devastation wrought by
Hurricanes Irma and María, Albizu Campos’s warning rings truer today than
it did even in the late 1940s, when the island was abuzz with the possibilities
of Estado Libre Asociado.
1. Puerto Rico v. Sanchez Valle, 36 S.Ct. 1863 (2016); Puerto Rico v. Franklin California
   Tax-Free Trust, et al. 136 S. Ct. 1938 (2016).
2. Cited in Marisa Rosado, Pedro Albizu Campos: Las llamas de la aurora, acercamiento
   a su biografía (San Juan: Ediciones Puerto, 2008), 350.
3. “Letter to Rafael Nadal of March 7, 1933,” in Pedro Albizu Campos: Obras escogidas,
   1923–1936, vol. 1, ed. J. Benjamín Torres (San Juan: Editorial Jelofe, 1975), 241.
4. “Letter to Rafael Nadal of March 7, 1933,” in Pedro Albizu Campos, 241.
5. “Letter to Rafael Nadal of March 7, 1933,” in Pedro Albizu Campos, 241.
6. El Mundo, “El estado federal para PR no es acceptable porque destruira nuestra
   personalidad colectiva,” January 31, 1923, in Torres, Pedro Albizu Campos, 14
   (emphasis in original).
PSYCHOANALYSIS AS A POLITICAL ACT AFTER
                MARÍA

                        Patricia Noboa Ortega

When I was invited to participate in the panel “Transforming María,” I asked
myself the following questions: What should we transform? Can we
transform our collective and individual pain? If so, how? Based on these
questions, I will describe, as a psychologist, the type of support I offered in
communities in Puerto Rico after María’s impact, and as a researcher, I will
present ethnographic research that I conducted in one community and share
some of the results.1
   A month after María struck the island, I, like many Puerto Ricans, was
dealing with a sense of loss, impotence, and anger. These feelings arose every
time I heard on the radio or read in the news about the local and federal
governments’ poor response to the disaster. To transform those emotions, I
decided to participate in an initiative by the Puerto Rican College of
Physicians and Surgeons, which organized health brigades to visit affected
communities and offer health services. The brigades were composed of
family doctors, pediatricians, psychologists, nurses, and medical students,
among others.


              PSYCHOANALYSIS AS A POLITICAL ACT

I went to the communities of Humacao, Canóvanas, and Utuado. I am a
psychologist with a background in psychoanalysis, so as a member of the
health brigades, I tried to provide a space in which residents could talk about
their experiences and thus give them the opportunity to calm their anguish
and discomfort. I tried to sustain a space for them to talk about their distress,
suffering, and sense of abandonment.
     As psychoanalysis opens a space for human beings to calm their anguish
through words, it also makes it possible for another person to respectfully
listen without giving a diagnosis or prescribing anything. This is a political
task, since psychoanalysis views the subject in its singularity and
acknowledges that what provokes suffering in each subject is unique. For
example, during the hurricane, two human beings could have lost the same
object (car, bed, house, photographs, etc.), but the response to each loss is
different. Perhaps one cried inconsolably for a long time, without sleeping or
eating properly, and each time the thought of the object came to mind, one
experienced an acute pain in the chest, a state of anguish. To the field of
psychoanalysis, the cause of this suffering does not lie solely in the loss of
the object; the object in itself does not carry meaning, which results from the
representations that the subject makes of the lost object.
     In my case, I remember the noise of the winds coming through my
windows during the storm, blowing with all their strength against my sliding
doors. Recklessly, I confronted the winds, pushing the sliding doors back in
place. I knew I was risking my life, but I was also trying to protect everything
I had worked so hard for throughout the years: my home, which was much
more than a sofa, dining table, or kitchen. That space represented the
promises I made to myself in my childhood. I wanted to become an
independent woman who could provide for herself, someone who was not
going to live in poverty anymore. Those signifiers, or representations, gave
me the strength to defend and protect my home while risking my life. For a
psychoanalyst to pay attention to that kind of psychic reality is a political act,
as long as the subject’s grief is addressed in the therapeutic process.
     Much of human suffering is caused by the excessive exigencies imposed
on people when they identify with cultural ideals, such as that one must be
happy or “stand out” in one’s discipline. Psychoanalytic practice allows the
analyst to disidentify from such cultural exigencies while helping the subject
assume a different, more critical position toward them.2 As Willy Apollon, a
Haitian philosopher and psychoanalyst, points out in his text What Is
Psychoanalysis?, “It is the possibility of calming the anguish through a word
that is articulated and understood. It is the possibility of treating the
symptoms, the unexplained sense of pain. It is the possibility of discovering
what directs our life and that which we ignore. Psychoanalysis is a task
drawn from the unconscious.”3
    An Argentine psychoanalyst, Juan David Nasio, in his book, Yes,
Psychoanalysis Cures (2017), asserts, “To listen to the speaker is to
concentrate actively on what he says, to try to go beyond the words he utters
and, above all, more than anything else, to feel his conscious emotion in us
and if possible, his painful and unconscious emotion.” Let me share one
experience that illustrates my act of listening.
    The brigade was offering its services at a church in Punta Santiago, a
poor community in Humacao, on the east coast of the island. There, I met a
woman who was about sixty-five years old. She was married and had an adult
daughter. She and her husband were fishers and had a fish shop. At the
church, she was handing out coffee to those who were waiting to be seen by
the doctors. I greeted her warmly and asked her, “Elisa, how are you? How is
this leader?” (she was one of the leaders who helped organize the activity.)
She looked at me with surprise and asked, “How do you know my name?” I
told her it was written on her name tag. She looked at her chest, laughed, and
talked to me. She told me how difficult the hurricane had been for her. She
named all the things she had lost. “I lost my clothes, my shoes, my washing
machine, my dryer, my car, my fish for sale, and the refrigerator where I put
the fish,” she said.
    Right away, she added, “Those are material things. They do not matter.
At least we are alive.” I answered, “Is that so?” This question seemed to
trigger something in her, and she started to cry. Immediately, she said, “I
cannot cry. Here, they need me. I must be strong. I cannot become lost. I
cannot lose my mind.” I replied, “Tell me more about what you lost.” Elisa
started telling me about the bed she had lost and how losing it had forced her
to sleep at the parish church, and for her doing this was like “invading” that
space. She was “invading the preacher’s house,” and she did not want to feel
this way. Elisa “did not want to bother” anyone. She told me all this, crying
and full of grief.
    I want to highlight significant aspects of her narrative and how I listened
to her pain. First, my question “Is that so?” opened a space for her to
elaborate in her own words the pain and suffering she was going through, the
loss of the bed, how that loss led her to sleep at the parish church, and how
she signified that as an “invasion.” María has definitely been a traumatic
event for everyone in Puerto Rico. Each of us, however, experienced and
gave meaning to the event and our losses in a unique way. In the
psychoanalytic approach, we listen to the present trauma (Hurricane María),
but we also listen to past traumas. These are unique experiences that the
subject has never named or spoken of, but now María has triggered them.
    Second, my question “Is that so?” responded to the discourses of
resilience that appeared after María, such as “Puerto Rico se levanta” (Puerto
Rico rises up) or “Vamos pa’lante” (Onward). These discourses emphasize
individual responsibility, but they do not necessarily reflect the government’s
responsibility toward us. When we identify with these discourses, they
become exigencies in our mourning process. I want to underline two
exigencies that Elisa had toward herself:

1. She had to be a strong woman who resists crying. For her, crying was a
sign of weakness, and it could make her lose her mind. To understand her
worry over “losing her mind,” it is important to mention that she had received
prior psychiatric treatment as a consequence of losing her job. For the past
thirteen years, because of the economic recession in Puerto Rico, we have
lost 272,000 jobs, and serious mental illness afflicts 7.3 percent of adults
(eighteen to sixty-four years old). In other words, more than 165,000 adults
need mental health services.4 5

2. She had to be attentive. She had to respond to the needs of her family, her
community. But she seemed to refuse to acknowledge her own needs, and
when they were addressed, she experienced anguish.
    This case illustrates what we have been living through in Puerto Rico
before María, such as losing jobs because of the economic crisis. Community
leaders, especially women, have been taking care of family and community
needs, dealing alone with their pain and with the limitations of psychiatric
treatment, much of which relies on psychotropic medication.6 This
medication treats the biochemistry of the organism, operating exclusively in
the biological field. But it does not treat the causes of depression, such as the
excessive exigencies imposed on the subject to comply with a cultural ideal.7
In psychoanalysis the illness in the subject is not conceptualized as a medical
object; the subject suffers because he or she is in conflict with him- or herself
or with others. Precisely through analysis, those interior or exterior conflicts
begin to disappear. From a psychoanalytic point of view, a person is “cured”
when they can love themselves as they are, when they have become more
tolerant of themselves and their surroundings and, therefore, also more
tolerant of others.8 This approach to mental health is political as long as the
clinical work disengages from the ideals promoted by capitalist culture.


               ETHNOGRAPHY AS A POLITICAL ACT

My ethnographic work was conducted in Valle Hill, a sector from the San
Isidro community in Canóvanas. San Isidro is located near the flood plain of
Río Grande de Loíza, the most abundant river on the island. Valle Hill is
located in a flood zone.
    According to the 2010 Census, 6,288 residents live in San Isidro; 53
percent are women, 53 percent are unemployed, 46 percent are employed (in
service and office occupations, as well as in retail, manufacturing,
construction, and waste management), 67 percent obtained a high school
diploma; 95 percent are Puerto Ricans, 2.1 percent are Dominicans, and 59
percent live below the poverty level.9 Residents do not have a sewer or a
potable-water system; they do not have a community center, Head Start
program, library, or sports or recreational facilities.10 About thirty-five
hundred residents live in Valle Hill, an area of San Isidro. Many are
immigrants from the Dominican Republic.11 Some have been living there for
the past twenty-five years. Many came to Valle Hill because a former mayor,
José “Chemo” Soto, made available plots of land to construct houses in hopes
of “a new beginning.” Throughout the years, residents, with the support of
the municipal government, have been illegally filling the wetlands to
construct homes. Because of those violations, the Environmental Protection
Agency penalized the municipal government with a $128,000 fine.
    The poor-quality materials used, like tin roofs and deteriorated wood, and
the informal construction practices coupled with living over a wetland, have
created conditions of vulnerability toward a weather event like María. I came
to Valle Hill in October 2017, a month after María. The level of destruction
there had such an impact on me that I decided to come back. About 41
percent (900) of the houses were completely destroyed.12 In Puerto Rico,
two hundred and fifty thousand homes were severely damaged.13
    In November, I met with the Valle Hill Community Board members.
Jannette Lozada, the president of the board, started the meeting talking about
the loss of her mother, who died during Hurricane Irma. Alberto, another
board member, told me about the death of his neighbor (who died of
leptospirosis), and how he almost drowned during María (he stayed home
during the hurricane). These expressions refer to death—the loss of a mother
and a neighbor, and the possibility of dying oneself, thus illustrating the
collective trauma that was experienced in Puerto Rico after María. Some
three thousand people died, according to estimates, mostly because the health
system collapsed. About three-quarters of hospitals were not operating,
treatment clinics were closed, and over one thousand medical offices and
pharmacies were not providing services. All in all, this was because the
island’s general infrastructure collapsed—there was no electricity, running
water, or telecommunications. Three months after María, many people died
because of accidents, heart attacks, diabetes, sepsis (because of high
temperatures in the hospitals and unsanitary conditions), suicides, respiratory
conditions, and high blood pressure. Twenty-six people were certified as
having died from leptospirosis; most of these deaths occurred from
September 2017 to March 2018.14
    In this immediate context of destruction, and in the long-term context of
poverty, exclusion, and discrimination in Valle Hill San Isidro and
throughout Puerto Rico, I wanted to document and highlight how the Valle
Hill residents recovered from Hurricane María through their collective
actions, on their own terms. I listened to their narratives and reflected on the
experiences they shared with me and how and why they did so. I was also
open to their interests and needs. The health brigades’ response, including
providing services and distributing donated supplies, had to be fast because
the priority was to meet the residents’ basic needs, not carry out research.
Nonetheless, I was able to carry out my research, focusing on three main
questions: (1) What challenges did people face in their recovery process? (2)
How did they cope with those challenges? (3) What psychosocial effects
were they dealing with? I relied on participant observation, field notes,
ethnographic interviews (unstructured and structured), and ethnographic
narratives.
    Acknowledging that basic needs must be met to begin the recovery
process, we started identifying the residents’ needs and brought donations
(water filters, clothes, medications, furniture, and food). We also brought a
lawyer to help them appeal FEMA decisions. We coordinated health brigades
for the bedridden and the elderly, like Abuelo, who had not received medical
attention for the past seven years. We held an art activity for children. We
wanted them to draw their experiences of Hurricane María. Their mothers
told us they were very anxious. Because of the sustained and respectful
support we gave them, we built a trustful relationship with the residents of
Valle Hill.
    Before María hit Puerto Rico, the municipal government opened shelters,
but because many of them lacked food and water and had poor hygiene,
residents decided to stay in their community. They trusted their immediate
neighbors, not the municipal government. Those residents who stayed in their
homes or neighbors’ houses encountered over fifteen feet of water (which
was contaminated from the wetland and with sewage from flooded septic
tanks). Residents were rescued by boats and improvised rafts, such as
refrigerators. Some neighbors even had to swim from their houses to rescue
these residents. Because of the flooding, residents lost all they had. As Lulú,
a Dominican woman, said, “I cannot forget that image when I came by and
saw all the houses destroyed, but the big thing for me was when I arrived
here [referring to her house]. There was nothing. Everything was gone.” In
this context of loss and destruction, facing years of social exclusion as a
result of racism, discrimination, and stigmatization, the Valle Hill residents
started their recovery process.
    Several residents have been discriminated against because they are poor,
Black, and do not speak English. Many residents commented that FEMA
inspectors spoke little or no Spanish. Others reported that they were
mistreated by the inspectors: they were told to be silent, the inspectors joked
about the situation, and they received FEMA correspondence in English,
even though the residents had requested them in Spanish. Other residents did
not receive guidance on the appeal process. All this constituted an obstacle
for residents with limited English.
    The case of Lulú illustrates the federal authorities’ discrimination against
the community. Lulú has lived in Puerto Rico for several years, works in a
school, and is a cosmetology teacher. She lost her home, which also served as
her studio. She made an album to document her losses and facilitate FEMA’s
inspection. The album included a photograph in which the mannequin heads
she uses in her cosmetology courses appeared. When a FEMA inspector, who
knew little Spanish, came to her house, she sarcastically asked Lulú, “Are
those heads FEMA inspectors’ heads?” In other words, she was suggesting
that Lulú was practicing witchcraft against FEMA inspectors. When Lulú
saw my face of indignation, she told me, “Hey, they can cut the branch but
not the trunk” (Nos pueden cortar las ramas, pero no el tronco), suggesting
that this insensitive and disrespectful comment did not break her. Valle Hill is
not the only community that suffers discrimination; other communities have
also been discriminated against in Puerto Rico.15 When you feel
discriminated against, when someone treats you disrespectfully, as though
you are dishonest or a less intelligent person, this negatively affects your
psychological health, exacerbating feelings of sadness, abandonment, anger,
and loneliness.16




Pages from Lulú’s album. Photo by author.


     Valle Hill’s recovery was undertaken by residents whose houses were
damaged, along with neighbors, family members, nonprofit organizations
(Techo, Red Cross, Catholic and evangelical churches Amma—Embracing
the World—Eaton), private and financial entities (Banco Santander),
cooperatives (Cooperativa Ecológica de Permacultura para un Puerto Rico
Autosuficiente y Cooperativa de Ahorro y Crédito Roosevelt Roads, and
citizen groups (like Brigada de Todxs). Some of them brought donations,
installed tarps, or helped rebuild houses. Some residents shared meals they
prepared and built a community kitchen; other residents shared donations
they received with their close neighbors. Some offered their own homes as
shelters (for months) or helped clean their neighbors’ houses. Some residents
cleaned the streets, which were full of debris, or cleaned up the wetland.17
Brigade members assess a damaged home. Photo by author.


    As in many communities in Puerto Rico, Valle Hill community members
raised money, procured electrical equipment, and reconnected to the
electrical grid. These collective actions of survival, however, did not prevent
the deterioration of the residents’ health. Diabetes, cancer, hypertension,
gastrointestinal diseases, asthma, allergies, and skin diseases led some
residents, like Cano, to die. Cano had respiratory problems and sleep apnea.
Both conditions required medical equipment, which he could not use after the
storm because there was no electricity. Cano’s case illustrates how
preexisting conditions, without equipment, electricity, and access to medical
treatment, caused deaths. When I heard about his death, I visited Ana, Cano’s
wife. When she saw me, she hugged me strongly and told me crying, “I could
not save him. I lost him.”
Cano before his death. Photo by author.


    The residents attended to supplying their immediate needs, such as water,
shelter, food, clothes, and medication, while expressing their suffering to
others. It seems to me that narrating that suffering served as a political
strategy to attain a necessary good in the recovery process. For example, on
many occasions, residents would cry because of what they had lost. One
resident said, “This Christmas will be the worst because I will not have my
children with me.” This resident’s children had migrated to the United States,
and the street where they lived was now empty. As a result, this resident not
only lost family but also neighbors who left their houses; it was a desolate
scene indeed. Another resident commented, “I lost everything. The only thing
I have left is what I have on [the clothes she was wearing] and these sandals.”
This resident spent the hurricane at the hospital because she had no one who
could pick her up; she spent several days in anguish, feeling helpless, and not
knowing if her house had survived the storm. A community leader would
often say, “My community is being emptied,” referring to all the residents
who had migrated to the United States or returned to their families in the
Dominican Republic. About one hundred and sixty thousand Puerto Ricans
migrated to the United States after the storm, according the Center for Puerto
Rican Studies. This exodus represents one of the most significant relocations
of Puerto Ricans to the US mainland in history.18
    Ana María Fernández, an Argentine psychoanalyst, once said, “We
cannot psychologize the social.”19 In other words, we should recognize how
culture, economics, and politics cause suffering among our citizens. If we
want to transform our collective pain, we must work toward changing those
circumstances and understanding the subjective causes, the ones that are
based on the singular experiences each of us have had with Hurricane María
in Puerto Rico. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to continue opening
spaces to listen to the residents’ pain. That is why we developed a Legal and
Psychological Clinic (LPC)20 to address the legal problems residents have
faced by accessing the economic assistance they are entitled to, and also
sustaining a space for them to talk about the pain, sadness, and adversities
they have struggled with in the aftermath of disaster.
    The legal component of the LPC’s work is to help participants perceive
themselves as (1) knowledgeable of their rights and the steps they have to
follow for their recovery or displacement process, (2) more prepared to
identify their needs, and (3) able to use the legal tools introduced to them in
the clinic to identify solutions to the problems they have faced during the
recovery process. In community meetings and orientations, we discussed
residents’ shared challenges in dealing with the municipal, local, and federal
governments. For example, FEMA is asking Valle Hill residents for a
certification issued by the Department of Housing to prove that they live
there. In the past, this certification was issued by the municipal government,
and residents had to apply every six months. Now, because more obstacles
are interrupting access to economic assistance, the process is more difficult
for them. We also conducted individual legal counseling by assisting
residents with their particular situations.
    The LPC’s psychological component aims to help participants perceive
themselves as more competent to (1) deal with the adversities, emotions
(anger and sadness), and psychological process (e.g., mourning) they have
experienced, and (2) to manage the difficulties, both emotional and
psychological, during their recovery process. Both the legal and
psychological components are addressed through community group
discussions. We want to create a common space in which people can talk to
each other about their suffering. Talking with one’s neighbors creates
proximity and trust, and it enhances one’s social support network. We also
offer individual clinical sessions (up to five sessions per participant), in
which people can elaborate through words the pain and sadness they are
dealing with. This individual work helps them gain insight into their
emotional and psychological dimensions, which are in a way unknown to
them.
1. This chapter is based on a paper presented at the New Brunswick Theological
    Seminary at a conference titled “Aftershocks of Disaster: Puerto Rico a Year after
    María.” at a panel titled “Transforming María,” at Rutgers University, New Brunswick,
    New Jersey. First published as “Psychoanalysis and Research for Communities,”
    Cruces, November 15, 2018. Research was supported by the National Institute of
    General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number
    R25GM121270. The content is solely the responsibility of the author and does not
    necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
2. For an in-depth analysis, see Jorge Alemán, Lacan y el capitalismo, Introducción a la
    Soledad: Común (Granada: Universidad de Granada, 2018).
3. Willy Apollon, ¿Qué es el psicoanálisis? Escuela Freudiana de Quebec. For an in-
    depth analysis, see Willy Apollon, Danielle Bergeron, Lucie Cantin, “Tratar la
    psicosis,” in Tratar la psicosis (Polemos, Buenos Aires, 1997). Also, Willy Apollon,
    Danielle Bergeron, Lucie Cantin. After Lacan: Clinical Practice and the Subject of the
    Unconscious (New York: State University of New York, 2002).
4. Jose Caraballo, “El efecto exacerbante del huracán María sobre la quebrada economía
    de Puerto Rico,” Oral presentation in Symposium of Huracán María at the University
    of Puerto Rico Cayey, 2019.
5. Glorisa Canino et al., “Need Assessment Study of Mental Health and Substance Use
    Disorder and Service Disorder and Utilization Among Adult Population of Puerto
    Rico,” Behavioal Sciences Research Institute Final Report, December 15, 2016.
6. For an in-depth analysis, see María Dolores-Fernós, Marilucy González Báez, Yanira
    Reyes-Gil, and Esther Vicente, “Voces de mujeres: estrategias de supervivencia y de
    fortalecimiento mutuo tras el paso de los huracanes Irma y María,” Inter-Mujeres,
    2018.
7. Elisabeth Roudinesco, ¿Por qué el psicoanálisis? (Buenos Aires, Argentina: Paidós,
    2007).
8. Juan Nasio, Sí, el psicoanálisis cura (Buenos Aires, Argentina: Paidos, 2017).
9. Características económicas seleccionadas comunidad San Isidro; Encuesta sobre
    Comunidad de Puerto Rico del 2012–16. Estimado de cinco años. Tabla DP03.
10. Oficina de Comunidades Especiales, Perfil Socioeconómico de la Comunidad de Valle
    Hill, 2003.
11. Jannette Lozada, Valle Hill community leader.
12. Jannette Lozada, Valle Hill community leader.
13. Justicia Ambiental, Desigualdad y Pobreza en Puerto Rico. Informe Multisectorial
    sobre las violaciones de derechos económicos, sociales, y medioambientales tras el
    paso        de        los       huracanes        Irma         y        María   (2017)
    https://noticiasmicrojuris.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/final-informe-cidh-audiencia-
    pr-dic-2017.pdf.
14. Centro de Periodismo Investigativo, Los muertos de María (serie investigativa),
    September 2018, http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2018/09/los-muertos-de-maria/;
    Centro de Periodismo Investigativo, Vidas de damnificados por María aún penden de
    un hilo, September, 2018, http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2018/06/vidas-de-
    damnificados-por-Maria-aunpenden-de-un-hilo/        and      Centro     de     Periodismo
    Investigativo, Investigación CPI+CNN: Puerto Rico tuvo un brote de leptospirosis tras
    el huracán María, pero el gobierno no lo dice, July, 2018,
    http://periodismoinvestigativo.com/2018/07/puerto-rico-tuvo-un-brote-de-
    leptospirosis-tras-el-huracan-maria-pero-el-gobierno-no-lo-dice/.
15. ICADH, Justicia Ambiental: Desigualdad y Pobreza en Puerto Rico, 2017,
    https://noticiasmicrojuris.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/final-informe-cidh-audiencia-
    pr-dic-2017.pdf.
16. C. F. Weems, S. E. Watts, M. A. Marsee, L. K. Taylor, N. M. Costa, M. F. Cannon,
    and A. Pina, “The Psychological Impact of Hurricane Katrina: Contextual Differences
    in Psychological Symptoms, Social Support and Discrimination,” Behavior Research
    and Therapy 45, no. 10 (October 2007), 2295–306.
17. Some residents fill the river channel with garbage and debris to construct their houses.
    In the past, a marshal was appointed to deter this practice. Some residents commented
    that to date, no security measures have been taken to finally stop this practice.
18. Jennifer Hinojosa and Edwin Meléndez, “Puerto Rican Exodus: One Year Since
    Hurricane María,” Center for Puerto Rican Studies, September 2018,
    https://centropr.hunter.cuny.edu/research/data-center/research-briefs/puerto-rican-
    exodus-one-year-hurricance-maria.
19. Ana Fernández, “Hacia los Estudios Transdisciplinarios de la Subjetividad:
    Reformulaciones académico-políticas de la diferencia.” Revista Investigaciones en
    Psicología 1, nos. 0329–5893 (2011): 61–82.
20. Funded by Fundación Acceso a la Justicia.
   AUTHENTICATING LOSS AND CONTESTING
               RECOVERY

 FEMA and the Politics of Colonial Disaster Management

                           Sarah Molinari

The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has consumed
headlines in Puerto Rico since Hurricane María made landfall. From the
prestorm understaffing and lack of Spanish-speaking workers to the
undelivered pallets of water and big contracts for inexperienced bidders,
news of the US disaster agency’s problems grabbed local and international
media attention. But the FEMA central operations hub had an air of
efficiency and organization. The GRF Media building in Guaynabo that
houses FEMA’s central offices bustled like a newsroom on the day I visited
to conduct an interview—rows of open desks, phones ringing, message
boards, maps, and hundreds of staffers. Behind the appearance of smooth
operations, however, were layers of failure and incomplete recovery.
According to FEMA data,1 the agency approved 464,821 applications for the
Individual and Household Assistance Program, which covers repair costs to
primary residence personal property and household structural damage in
designated “essential living areas.”2 But this number fails to account for
those who were approved but underfunded and for the more than three
hundred thousand applicants who were denied. While many filed appeals,
FEMA denied or did not respond to 79 percent of the appeal claims.3 I argue
that institutional failure gave way to contested recovery frameworks that
challenge the assumptions of colonial disaster management and its
disciplining tools.
       UNEQUAL DISASTER AND “OTRAS MARÍAS” IN LAS
                  CAROLINAS, CAGUAS

In the semirural neighborhood of Las Carolinas, Caguas, where I am
conducting ethnographic research and collaborating with the neighborhood
Centro de Apoyo Mutuo (CAM; Mutual Support Center), layered
abandonment over time and demographic specificities exacerbated the impact
of Hurricane María. sixty to seventy percent of the community’s twenty-five
hundred residents are over fifty-five years old, and one in three households
lives below the poverty line.4 According to the Residents’ Association, Las
Carolinas has lost 20 percent of its population since 2013, leaving behind
elderly residents with tenuous family support. In the words of a CAM leader
reflecting on the storm’s one-year anniversary, “Before living through María,
we experienced otras Marías. Because for the people with less resources,
we’re the ones who are always at the bottom.”
    Families left Las Carolinas in large numbers, especially in 2017 when the
Puerto Rico Department of Education shut down the María Montañez Gómez
elementary school as part of that year’s wave of 167 school closures. Parents,
residents, and teachers had struggled since 2012 to keep Las Carolinas’s only
elementary school open through protests, standardized test boycotts, strikes,
and countless meetings with education and municipal officials. But the
Department of Education pointed to below-average scores on standardized
tests and declining enrollment, finally shutting the school down in spring
2017. Recalling the five-year struggle, one mother told me:

   My dad, aunts and uncles, my kids, and I all studied here. I remember the last
   sixth-grade graduation here was when my youngest son graduated. … I remember
   we held a strike to protest the school closing, and a friend of mine asked me,
   “What are you doing here?” And I said, “Why are you asking me this?” “Because
   your son already graduated,” she said. And I said, “What does that have to do with
   anything? My son graduated, but he came from here, and I still have his cousins
   here, and I’m here for them, and for your daughter too, who’s still here.

    After María, Las Carolinas residents went without water service for three
months, without electricity for seven months, and without storm municipal
debris pickup for eighty days. During the post María wait for debris
collection, some residents made a monthly ritual out of acknowledging the
debris’s “birthday” and decorating the piles lining the streets with Christmas
ornaments. Trucks from the privately contracted company EC Waste finally
appeared in early December 2017 after the Residents’ Association president,
Miguel Rosario Lozada, wrote an op-ed in El Nuevo Día critiquing the mayor
and what he called “the absent municipal state.”5 Among other things, the
municipality kept delaying debris pickup, barely circulated information, and
originally scheduled Las Carolinas last among all the municipality’s
neighborhoods for power restoration.6
    Even after debris removal, residents organized cleaning brigades to do
basic vegetation maintenance like tree trimming and mowing around the
public streets. The hollowing out of these municipal services certainly
contributed to the posthurricane blackout and infrastructure collapse that was
part of a longer process of public divestment. For example, the municipality
of Caguas cut back on maintenance with a 14 percent total budget cut from
2016 to 2018, exacerbated by a $350 million cut from to the central
government’s contributions to all municipalities in fiscal year 2017–18—
budgets, of course, approved and imposed by the colonial Fiscal Control
Board, locally referred to as la Junta.7
    Beyond the uneven effects of austerity and María, disaster assistance and
recovery measures themselves may exacerbate vulnerability and inequality
over time.8 These contradictions have also shaped alternative ways of
imagining recovery through apoyo mutuo (mutual support) rather than
dominant individualizing and market-driven frameworks meant to restore
private property, wealth, and the existing social order.


 “TOTAL LOSS” AND THE STRUGGLE FOR A DIGNIFIED HOME

Jennifer, a resident of Las Carolinas, still lives with a blue tarp covering her
roof fifteen months after Hurricane María.9 She lives with five family
members in the basement of her house because the top floor is uninhabitable.
She applied for FEMA’s Individual and Household Assistance Program, and
FEMA inspectors arrived five weeks after María to declare Jennifer’s house a
“total loss.” Jennifer has lived in her home for forty-four years, but like many
others in the community who live on parcelas that have been divided over
time and passed on through inheritance, she does not have formal property
title.10 In fact, a confidential FEMA memo from 2011 lists Las Carolinas as
one of 116 areas in Puerto Rico that FEMA identifies as a “squatter
community.”11 The memo provides inspection guidelines and states that
squatters, and presumably the entire communities listed, are ineligible for
home repair assistance because “they are not the owner of the damaged
dwelling.” In November 2018 the FEMA Puerto Rico News Desk confirmed
with me via email correspondence that the 2011 squatter communities list had
not been updated, although it remains unclear whether this list was used
during Hurricane María and how the memo might have shaped prejudiced
assumptions about “squatters” and identified communities. Legal activist
groups like Ayuda Legal Huracán María pressured FEMA to revise its policy
on verifying and assisting individual owners ten months after María.12 Under
the revised policy, applicants could submit a “declarative statement” to
“prove” ownership with their FEMA appeals if they did not have a formal
title, but this was too little too late. FEMA failed to systematically circulate
information about this new option to verify ownership, leaving many who
would have qualified out of the loop.
     Because of her tenuous ownership status in the eyes of the state, Jennifer
applied for FEMA individual assistance supported by an affidavit from a pro
bono lawyer stating that she was the rightful owner and occupant of the home
and that she was securing her formal title. To Jennifer’s surprise, Puerto
Rico’s Departamento de Vivienda (Housing Department) finally began
processing her application for a formal title after María, even though she had
been applying for decades. She expressed to me a sense of relief because she
almost had her title, as if this document might reduce her vulnerability to
future storms.
     FEMA installed a blue tarp on Jennifer’s home and authorized $11,000 to
repair structural damage, including a new cement roof, doors, and windows.
Jennifer has not, however, been able to find a contractor to do the job within
this budget because she estimates that $11,000 will cover only materials,
wood, and some of the labor.13 She appealed the FEMA decision to try to get
a larger amount but was denied and could not understand how “total loss”
amounted to $11,000: “They came and took photos. They saw,” she said.
    To fill in the assistance gap, the Departamento de Vivienda recommended
that Jennifer apply for Tu Hogar Renace (Your Home Is Revived), a FEMA-
funded program locally administered through the Departmento de Vivienda
that provides up to $20,000 for minor emergency repairs to make houses
“safe and functional.” Tu Hogar Renace is organized around seven
construction conglomerates (five US companies, two Puerto Rican
companies) that have divided up the archipelago into contractor zones. Note
that the Texas-based SLS Company (designated for zone 2) was awarded a
$145 million contract in 2018 for Texas border wall construction,
highlighting the entanglements between the US disaster and security
industries. These seven major companies then contract smaller construction
companies in Puerto Rico to provide labor and materials, but the major
profits are funneled to the top. My interviews with Tu Hogar Renace and
FEMA inspectors revealed the exploitative nature of inspection work.
Inspectors working for FEMA’s subcontractors described working seven
days a week “de sol a sol” (from sunup to sundown) and driving in difficult
conditions in their personal vehicles, often without GPS or phone signal, to
inspect homes both before and after disaster aid was distributed. Inspectors,
many of them low-paid Puerto Rican workers with little experience or formal
training in this field, were generally paid per inspection, incentivizing them to
work like “machines,” as one inspector described. They act as the “eyes of
FEMA” and collect evidence on electronic tablets using formulas, written
comments, measurements, inventories, and photos to authenticate the owner’s
account of loss and damage; they then send the report to FEMA for quality-
control reviews for final approval. Even though final aid determinations are
out of their hands, inspectors described strategies like taking extra photos or
photographing structural damage at dramatic angles to help residents receive
the most aid possible. One of the main tasks for workers doing Tu Hogar
Renace final inspections was to ensure that the house was “habitable” and
that all construction materials and appliances were properly installed and
made in the United States—if something was identified as an internationally
made product, it failed inspection and needed to be reinstalled.
Tu Hogar Renace contractors. Screenshot of website, November 2018.


    Tu Hogar Renace approved Jennifer for the maximum $20,000 for
interior repairs like replacing the stove, sinks, refrigerator, cabinets, and beds
and for installing electric generators.14 But Jennifer kept delaying the work
because it made no sense to install interior equipment without a proper roof.
“I was waiting and waiting, time was passing, and the roof was becoming
more damaged. And every time [Tu Hogar Renace] wanted to come and
install the equipment, I had to stop them because without a roof everything
inside the house would be damaged,” she said. Tu Hogar Renace told
Jennifer to call once she had the roof done. Then around September 2018, she
called because she had gotten some temporary zinc panels on part of the roof,
so she figured she could start installing the interior equipment little by little.
But Tu Hogar Renace had closed her case without any notification. “Time
was up,” they told her, and the promised $20,000 vanished. Ironically, Tu
Hogar Renace’s webpage logo reads, “The first step to your recuperation”
(https://tuhogarrenace.com/).
    I asked Jennifer if she was going to appeal the Tu Hogar Renace decision,
which she had a right to do, but she said no because “they don’t answer the
phones. There are always problems with the contact. And so here I am.”
After the slow violence of the bureaucratic marathon that seemed to work
against her every step of the way, she felt resigned and overcome with a kind
of disaster assistance fatigue. The slow violence of this wait for documents,
inspections, follow-up calls, and contractors was not eventful or
extraordinary but rather banal, everyday, and formative of Jennifer’s
experience of post-disaster trauma and the anxiety of living without a roof.15
Jennifer’s experience unsettles the normative temporality of disaster that
moves linearly from response to recovery and rebuilding—without a proper
roof, “recovery” seemed stuck in time for her.


                 DISCIPLINING DISASTER SUBJECTS

Jennifer’s case highlights the disciplining role that property plays in
dominant institutional disaster relief frameworks, or the tensions between
FEMA’s reliance on formal property title versus people’s lived experience of
diverse property relations in Puerto Rico. Discourses stigmatizing residents
without formal property titles came up repeatedly in my interviews with
officials from agencies like FEMA and COR3.16 The project to “formalize
property” is in fact central to official visions of “resiliency,” mitigation, and
disaster preparedness in part because it ensures the smooth operation of the
homeowners’ insurance market and future property speculation. The July
2018 draft central government Disaster Recovery Plan proposes $800 million
to promote property title registration and establish penalties for those who do
not register, but with little detail about how this will be executed.
Furthermore, Puerto Rico’s Departamento de Vivienda’s amended Action
Plan for federal CDBG-DR funds includes a proposal for a $400 million
“Title Clearance Program” to formalize title for properties not located in
floodplains or landslide risk areas.17
    In late May 2018, I visited the Caguas Disaster Recuperation Center to
inquire about municipality-specific FEMA data because I could not find this
information online. There were only about four residents in a large
gymnasium making their rounds through the information tables. In fact, there
were more armed guards in the gymnasium than Caguas residents, although it
was unclear what the security threat was. The director told me he could not
give out any information, but he gave me a contact at the FEMA Media
Relations Department. From there, I communicated via email and was vetted
for over two months by both Media Relations and the News Desk to schedule
an interview with a high-ranking FEMA Coordination Officer in August
2018. This process of accessing information and navigating contacts and
offices was, of course, enabled by my own positionality as a white, English-
dominant visiting researcher.
    I was given a fifteen-minute time slot with this official and three of his
staff members, who sat in the room keeping time and audio-recording the
interview, which I was also audio-recording. I asked about FEMA’s
perspective on the widespread trouble people were having with their
applications and appeals. Referring to FEMA’s five- to ten-year vision, the
official said:

   We’re trying to change the culture of waiting for the last minute…. The people in
   Puerto Rico need to start thinking, “I need to take care of myself. I have to be
   responsible for my own future. I have to take action. I can’t wait for stuff to be
   given to me.” And I’m telling you because I’m Puerto Rican—this is cultural.
   They’re waiting for stuff to happen. We need to change that to be proactive for our
   own future. If you’re going to fix your house, don’t do it halfway. Use the best
   materials.

    I thought of Jennifer, who had been “taking action” all along, and all
those for whom “recovery” is an ambiguous promise. The FEMA 2018–22
Strategic Plan echoes this culturalist argument—promoting a neoliberal
“culture of preparedness,” as the Coordination Officer described. The plan
makes no mention of climate change, and its strategic goals include
encouraging local jurisdictions to invest in predisaster mitigation through
new financial instruments called resilience bonds; it also calls for expanding
homeowners’ flood insurance, incentivizing so-called positive behavior
change through training and exercises, and increasing personal financial
preparedness, which is hardly an easy task for vulnerable, racialized
populations most at risk in these disasters.18 For institutional agents of relief
and recovery, the ideal “disaster subject” could be thought of as a private
property-owning individual who has, a formal property title, home insurance,
flood insurance, savings in the bank, and a ten-day supply of food and water
for each person in the household.19
FEMA tweet on emergency financial preparedness, April 9, 2018.


    Personal indebting also figures as a disciplining tool of disaster recovery.
In August 2018 representatives from FEMA and the National Flood
Insurance Program hosted a workshop in Las Carolinas to promote low-
interest loans from the federal Small Business Administration; these loans do
not have the same use restrictions as FEMA assistance and can be used for
individual households or small businesses to fill in relief funding gaps. After
a long PowerPoint presentation, the FEMA representative assured a group of
mostly elderly attendees that these loans are secure and nondiscriminatory,
unlike private bank loans: “When we think about loans, we think about
Banco Popular, but this is a loan to help after a disaster,” the representative
emphasized. This was met by one frustrated resident insisting that the
representative review other disaster relief options because debt is a hard thing
to sell among low-income, elderly people.


     REIMAGINING RECOVERY THROUGH APOYO MUTUO

But there are local alternative projects to reimagine disaster recovery
collectively rather than through racist cultural deficiency frameworks and
modes of indebting. For example, a number of autonomously organized
Centros de Apoyo Mutuo arose in the aftermath of Hurricane María,
including one in Las Carolinas. Here, Jennifer and other woman residents
occupy the closed María Montañez Gómez elementary school, transforming
this abandoned space into a one of healing, care work, and learning that has
shifted in response to the community’s needs from the emergency to longer-
term recovery and local transformation. Women at the CAM cook and home-
deliver about one hundred lunches three times a week along two routes in the
community to elderly and bedridden residents and their caregivers, providing
a consistent presence and form of accompaniment. This amounts to about six
to eight hours of unpaid labor each day, in addition to the incalculable
emotional labor and their lives as mothers, grandmothers, partners, and
daughters. Besides the lunch delivery, the CAM’s major projects include a
weekly acupuncture clinic, gardens, a thrift shop, and an activity room for the
elderly, where they host talks and workshops, play dominoes, and do art
projects. CAM leaders are partnering with the Residents’ Association to
develop a community emergency plan, which will include converting part of
the school into an emergency shelter and administering a census to identify
residents’ specific circumstances, like whether they take medications, live
alone, and have limited mobility.
Centro de Apoyo Mutuo, Las Carolinas. Photo by author.


    Local projects of autogestión cannot replace holding state institutions like
FEMA accountable and demanding access to the disaster assistance and
public services that people have every right to. But the politics of Apoyo
Mutuo in this particular case demonstrate another path forward—albeit one
constrained and shaped by relations of power—that is framed around support
and affective relationalities.20 This “social ecology of support”21 rejects
individualizing frameworks that render people as consumers in a recovery
market who are disciplined through relations of property and debt and thus
may point to a more equitable path forward.
1. FEMA,             “Puerto        Rico         Hurricane       María        (DR-4339),”
    https://www.fema.gov/disaster/4339.
2. “Essential living areas” are spaces including the kitchen, bedroom, and bathroom. This
    category excludes spaces like patios, second or third bathrooms, or bedrooms above the
    home’s number of residents.
3. Nicole Acevado, “FEMA Has Either Denied or Not Approved Most Appeals for
    Housing       Aid      in   Puerto    Rico,”     NBC     News,    July    17,   2018,
    https://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/puerto-rico-crisis/fema-has-either-denied-or-not-
    approved-most-appeals-housing-n891716.
4. American Community Survey, Bureau of the US Census, “Selected Economic
    Characteristics: 2013–17 American Community Survey Five Year Estimates,” 2017,
    https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/community_facts.xhtml.
5. Miguel Ángel Rosario Lozada, “Un gobierno municipal ausente,” El Nuevo Día,
    November                                      7,                                2017,
    https://www.elnuevodia.com/opinion/columnas/ungobiernomunicipalausente-columna-
    2372408/.
6. After pressure from the El Nuevo Día column and a community protest at the local
    power servicing plant, Las Carolinas was reprioritized by the municipality and moved
    up in the power restoration schedule. Its power was restored in March 2018.
7. Caguas Municipal Budget, Fiscal Year 2017–18. https://caguas.gov.pr/wp-
    content/uploads/2017/07/Presupuesto-Modelo-2017-2018.pdf
8. See Junia Howell and James R Elliott, “Damages Done: The Longitudinal Impacts of
    Natural Hazards on Wealth Inequality in the United States,” Social Problems, August
    14, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1093/socpro/spy016; Vincanne Adams, Markets of Sorrow,
    Labors of Faith: New Orleans in the Wake of Katrina (Durham, NC: Duke University
    Press, 2013.
9. All names, except identifiable public figures, are pseudonyms.
10. In interviews and conversations, residents describe three main property divisions in
    Las Carolinas: parcelas viejas, el fanguito, and la urbanización. Parcelas viejas are
    plots of land distributed around the mid-twentieth century to those who “established”
    the community. Some parcelas have been subdivided among families or passed on
    across generations, and many do not have titles. El fanguito is described as terreno
    invadido, or squatted land. Residents of el fanguito may have been ineligible for
    FEMA aid because they live in a flood zone and were asked to relocate some years
    ago. Those who refused to relocate now do not have rights to FEMA assistance. La
    urbanización popularly refers to the more economically privileged residents, who all
    have titles to their property.
11. Federal Emergency Management Agency, “Memo on Non-traditional Forms of
    Housing,” 2011.
12. Ayuda Legal Huracán María (ALHM), Manual de abogacía para desastres Puerto
    Rico, San Juan: ALHM, 2018.
13. As of the writing of this essay, Jennifer has kept the $11,000 untouched in a
    cooperative bank account and has refused to use it for other financial needs that have
    arisen. She remains determined to use the allocated money to fix her house, even
    though it probably will not be enough.
14. Jennifer did not previously have electric generators, and I’ve found in multiple
    interviews that Tu Hogar Renace installs or adds things like smoke detectors and
    electric generators onto their jobs that were not there before or were not requested by
    the homeowner. These, of course, raise the aid estimate and thus the profits to the
    contracted companies.
15. On “slow violence” and the politics of waiting, see Javier Auyero, Patients of the
    State: The Politics of Waiting in Argentina (Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
    2012); Rob Nixon, Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor (Cambridge,
    MA: Harvard University Press, 2011).
16. COR3 is the Central Office of Recovery, Recuperation, and Resiliency, an agency
    under the Puerto Rico Public-Private Partnerships Authority (P3).
17. The Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery Program is
    administered by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
    and provides recovery funding to declared US disaster zones. The estimated CDBG-
    DR funds designated for Puerto Rico is about $20 billion.
18. Federal Emergency Management Agency, Strategic Plan, 2018–22, 2018.
    https://www.fema.gov/media-library-
    data/1533052524696b5137201a4614ade5e0129ef01cbf661/strat_plan.pdf.
19. See, for example, how FEMA’s Strategic Plan, 2018–22 uses language on “resiliency”
    and building a “culture of preparedness.”
20. Autogestión has no direct translation to English. It can be loosely translated to
    autonomous or self-organizing practices, often without any institutional or direct state
    ties.
21. Eric Klinenberg, Heat Wave: A Social Autopsy of Disaster in Chicago (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 2015).
                    THE ENERGY UPRISING

     A Community-Driven Search for Sustainability and
              Sovereignty in Puerto Rico

                         Arturo Massol-Deyá

Before Hurricane María struck Puerto Rico on September 20, 2017, I walked
the streets of the small mountainous municipality of Adjuntas, in silence. I
whispered my farewells with the strange feeling that everything would be
different after the storm. Indeed, María’s devastation of both the natural
landscape and the built infrastructure became apparent everywhere. Hundreds
of houses, many of them without roofs, showed significant damage.
Landslides and fallen trees made roads inaccessible, and power lines were
down everywhere. Bare trees made the landscape look near total desolation.
There was no electricity, the potable water service was intermittent, and the
only supermarket in town was destroyed by what looked like an act of war.
Adjuntas was cut off from the rest of Puerto Rico and from the planet, and
there was no fuel available. Hundreds of “refugees” were stuck in cramped,
makeshift public shelters that had few cots to sleep on and that lacked food,
medicine, and basic services.
    The hurricane struck Puerto Rico after more than a decade of economic
depression and austerity measures. As a result, government preparedness was
every day more limited while resources were directed to a favored few. For
example, the government used emergency decrees to fast-track projects
without having to abide by laws or regulations. The government did this in
2010 with an emergency energy decree to impose a ninety-three-mile-long
natural gas pipeline through water resources, forestlands, agricultural areas,
wetlands, and densely populated areas on an island one hundred miles in
diameter. The government promised to solve the country’s energy problems
with a tube and thus spent millions of dollars—aggravating the fiscal crisis of
the Puerto Rican Electric Power Authority (PREPA) instead of addressing
Puerto Rico’s real energy crisis: that the energy system is based on exploiting
nonrenewable resources.
     Given the well-documented effects of greenhouse gas emissions on global
warming and climate change, pursuing a better future must unequivocally
include addressing our dependence on fossil fuels. A group of researchers
from Florida State University and Princeton University estimated that for
every one-degree Celsius rise in the surface temperature of the sea, a
hurricane’s winds can accelerate by eighteen miles per hour, enough to
change its category.1 In addition, the increase in heat means higher rates of
evaporation, or more water in the atmosphere. The higher temperatures
produced Hurricane María, which grew to the size of France, carried a
massive amount of water in its system, and thus had great destructive power,
creating catastrophic floods and landslides. After María passed through
Puerto Rico, we suffered the combined consequences of all these factors,
which included over one hundred thousand landslides, as documented by
satellite images and the US Forest Service. One of these landslides occurred
in the municipality of Utuado, where two sisters were buried alive in their
home. Others occurred in areas of steep hills where the ill-planned
construction of roads and buildings heightened the risk of landslides.
     To address these challenges and face the unique hazards of the twenty-
first century, we must better comprehend the ecological role of forests in
society, address water security, protect the coasts from sea level rise and
storm surges, rethink how we practice agriculture, and redesign our homes to
become more self-sustaining.
     The problem is that we recognize the warnings but fail to take proper
action. “Green” discourse now permeates politicians’ rhetoric while in
practice they perpetuate the burning of coal, insist on building incinerators,
and open new valves for natural gas. Meanwhile, they impede those who
promote renewable energy and the conservation of forests, which produce
clean air, buffer against floods, and help prevent droughts.
     The warnings about hurricanes and droughts have been on the table for
quite some time. In a world of increasingly extreme weather, it is
fundamental to promote a future that rejects crude capitalism, corruption, and
the clientelism that pervades our energy system.
                   PUERTO RICO’S POWER CRISIS

Adjuntas lost its electric service days before the storm when it still had not
seen an inch of rain or gusts of wind. No one was surprised when the
hurricane left PREPA unserviceable and exposed. The storm laid bare
PREPA’s antiquated energy model, based on power plants that burn oil, gas,
or coal. The plants’ by-products—including ash and carbon air emissions—
threaten the health of our people and our overheated planet. To this we can
add a huge public debt that represents one more aggression against our
children, who will end up migrating or paying for the mediocrity of corrupt
past decisions.
    Simply restoring the same failing infrastructure is not progress. The
country must go from mere aspiration to constructing a responsible and
resilient energy model based on renewable-energy sources, such as water,
wind, biomass, and, of course, solar power. Yet, with only a small window of
time to advance alternative sources of energy that might forestall climate
change, PREPA remains obsessed with previously discarded options, such as
natural gas, that should be left in the past. No more than 3 percent of Puerto
Rico’s electricity is generated with renewable-energy sources, yet the
government affirms that the system cannot increase this percentage because
the energy system “was not designed for renewables” and because “the sun
shines only during the day.”
    One thing remains clear: we must abandon fossil fuels and PREPA’s
obsolete energy model. PREPA maintains its astronomically high prices
because it monopolizes the energy market and blocks efforts to pursue
alternative energy sources.


   PRIVATIZATION COMPROMISES PUERTO RICO’S ENERGY
                    DEVELOPMENT

If there is something we know well by now in Puerto Rico, it is the integral
importance of our energy system. The hard lesson was learned, unfortunately,
because of the system’s obsolescence. After Hurricane María, we counted the
time without service in months, not days. The absence of electricity caused
greater insecurity, unemployment, bankruptcies, water contamination, as
treatment plants discharged raw sewage. All this was exacerbated by
hospitals’ inability to operate at full capacity. In the six months following the
storm, 2,975 people died and many more fled to the United States.
    With a population overwhelmed and suffering, many received the
government’s announcement to privatize the country’s electric system as the
logical step forward. The government claims that the power company’s
failures are a result of its being publicly owned and that it is thus the victim
of partisanship. After María, however, Puerto Rico was failed by both public
and privatized services (such as telecommunications). Yet the public energy
sector is decried, while private telecommunication companies are given a
pass. Undiscussed is that 30 percent of PREPA’s energy generation was
privatized in the mid-1990s. Privatization is not a new solution. The
privatized component of PREPA has largely dictated the company’s contracts
and new projects, which tripled the public debt even as its ability to operate
was decimated by the imposition of austerity measures.
    The private model has its sights set on expanding PREPA’s use of natural
gas, coal, and incinerators. This vision of Puerto Rico’s energy future, clearly
expressed by the governing Fiscal Control Board, is the greatest challenge
facing the country. Instead of maintaining our dependence on fossil fuels and
spending over $2.8 million annually just for fuel, we must aim for energy
self-sufficiency.
    Our experience after Hurricane María should be sufficient to instigate a
change in direction. Since the storm, PREPA has resorted to subcontracting
recovery operations to private, mostly US-based companies. There is no
longer a local-public potential to respond because it had been dismantled.
Fiscal austerity measures had led to the elimination of maintenance brigades
and response bodies, such as the Defensa Civil which used to be in each
municipality ready to respond immediately after the passage of a hurricane or
storm. Corrupt schemes were uncovered, such as the contracting of the
infamous Whitefish company, yet after that, similar examples followed.
Repair workers brought in from outside the island were up to ten times more
expensive than local union labor, and after months of contracts, much of the
country still had no power. It took almost a year for PREPA to announce that
power had been fully restored to Puerto Rico. Even still, of course, they left
many in the countryside in the dark, since it was unprofitable to provide them
with electricity unless the consumers themselves paid for utility poles and
assumed other costs.
    Initially, the number of fallen utility poles was used to define the degree
of damage. According to estimates, there were sixty-two thousand fallen
poles (although this figure was later reduced to forty-eight thousand). Based
on this and other observations, it was declared that 80 percent of our energy
system had collapsed. Yet none of the power plants suffered significant direct
damage from the hurricane, and in actuality over six hundred thousand utility
poles remained unaffected. Surely that number of fallen poles is substantial,
but it did not represent even 10 percent of the total. The damage to the
electrical system has been overstated as a means to conceal the incompetent
restoration process. Surprisingly, the privatized repair effort did not
expeditiously fulfill its task.


        IF THE VíA VERDE GAS PIPELINE EXISTED TODAY

In 2010, Governor Luis Fortuño’s administration declared a state of energy
emergency. The solution, according to them, was to build a ninety-three-
mile-long gas pipeline. The pipeline, deceptively called La Vía Verde (the
Greenway), would go through the steepest slopes of La Cordillera Central,
pass over (or below) 234 bodies of water, fragment farms and forests, and
pass through residential courtyards and over wetlands to reach PREPA’s
generating units in Palo Seco and San Juan.
    What would Hurricane María’s impact have been if we had allowed the
construction of Vía Verde? Would the electricity have been restored faster?
Would thousands of deaths have been prevented by having a gas pipeline?
Would the emissions and shrill noises of power plants have been avoided? Of
course not. We can surmise, however, that the landslides would have been
worse. The pipeline would have passed through exactly the mountainous
areas where landslides dragged down homes, bridges, roads, and other
infrastructure. Without trees and their roots, soils are more prone to
landslides.
    It was gross negligence to waste time and resources on the pipeline
project, which went nowhere, while neglecting the energy system’s critical
needs. The government knew the pipeline was technically infeasible because
Ecoeléctrica, the natural gas terminal in Peñuelas, lacked the capacity to
process enough surplus fuel to supply the pipeline. Moreover, trying to sell us
a pipeline as the solution to our energy crisis was an unjustified and corrupt
act. Instead of maintaining and strengthening the transmission and
distribution lines, the government dismembered PREPA with its austerity,
waste, and bad decisions. As a result, PREPA went bankrupt.
    Today’s posthurricane marauders, politicians and gas and oil industry
representatives, lobbying behind the people’s backs and making decisions
about the country’s reconstruction, are the same ones who wanted to
distribute pipeline contracts among their friends. In confronting them, we
must maintain an energy agenda that can be summed up with the words
“renewable resources.” It’s the only way to counter those whose farcical
discourse calls a pipeline a greenway.


                    IMPOSING ENERGY SLAVERY

Representative Rob Bishop (R-Utah), chairman of the House Committee on
Natural Resources, visited the island in May 2018 in the middle of the
extended emergency. “I’d like to see more natural gas ports here,” Bishop
said, admitting that he discussed the issue in Washington, DC, with
executives from private companies that he declined to name. His energy
agenda for Puerto Rico excludes solar and wind power, condemns the
Caribbean to dependence on fossil fuels, and uses Puerto Rico as both a
consumer and a distribution hub for the region.
    Deliberating and making decisions behind our backs, Washington
politicians (influenced by powerful lobbyists such as former governor
Fortuño) see a country to rebuild in a way that suits their interests. The US
government wants to keep us subjected to a model of energy dependence.
That is, “energy must be imported,” Bishop said, and “natural gas is a
brilliant way to do it.” The new American fever is not Californian gold or the
oil of the 1960s, but fracking, or hydrofracturing—one of this century’s most
destructive technologies, for extracting underground gas reserves. It is
therefore wrong to think that the United States has lost geographic interest in
our islands and would prefer that we become either a US state or an
independent nation. The energy agenda and the privatization model clearly
indicate US aims: to perpetuate Puerto Rico’s colonial status quo.
    Faced with this unfortunate and unjust colonial reality, we must organize
locally to reject the imposition of US energy dependence and propose an
agenda of energy self-sufficiency—one that emphasizes the clean and safe
energy sources that we have in great abundance. Generating energy with the
sun, water, wind, and biomass through micronetworks, hybrid systems, and
other configurations at the point of consumption is a route to achieve welfare
and progress for all and to start to decolonize Puerto Rico.


  TO GET OUT OF THE DARKNESS, BUILD AN ALTERNATIVE
                  ENERGY PRESENT

Surviving the enraged force of a modern hurricane, and then suffering the
collective despair of seeing so many people die because of the US
government’s historic gross negligence—this would make anyone seriously
question the immediate future.
     But in Adjuntas, we showed that alongside the despair there exists
another Puerto Rico, one where diverse, organized communities responded to
the emergency with self-management and a collective sense of hope.
     Casa Pueblo, a local community organization, served as an energy oasis
for the community, having dedicated itself to operate with renewable energy
since 1999. Casa Pueblo’s newly modernized system of solar energy resisted
the hurricane’s attack, allowing the community to undertake humanitarian aid
tasks in the village, rural beltways, and other municipalities. As one of the
first mitigation tasks, the #iLuminarPRconSOL initiative sought to mobilize
the Puerto Rican diaspora and friends of our self-management project to
overcome the collapse of our electrical grid. As a result, thousands of solar
lamps illuminated family homes throughout large areas.
     Given the collapse of Puerto Rico’s communication systems, it was
crucial in the first days of the crisis to connect hundreds of adjunteños with
their families through satellite telephony, community radio, and our social
networks. Meanwhile, multiple community chainsaws were passed from hand
to hand to help clear roads and residences. Volunteers distributed coolers,
water filters, clean water, food, and hygiene products. We also collected tarps
from the diaspora, which were brought directly to Puerto Rico by volunteers
when mail services were blocked. We distributed them in the mountains
weeks before FEMA even arrived.
     We decided to broaden our response with the goal of changing the energy
landscape through energy self-sufficiency projects that would address the
right to energy, communications, health, nutrition, entertainment, education,
and economic stimulus.
    Since February 2018, for example, the Pérez Barber Shop in Adjuntas has
been operating with a solar energy system that Casa Pueblo installed as part
of its economic development initiatives. Don Wilfredo, the barber, is the first
person I have known whose eyes sparkle when he is asked about his
electricity bill. Instead of the $75 to $80 that he used to pay monthly, his new
cost for solar power is about $5.80.
    One day, he told me, “I didn’t realize there was a blackout. The
customers are the ones who tell me when there’s no light in town.” He said
this with a combination of pride, happiness, and empathy for those who
remain in need. “There are many without power in the countryside,” he said.
    The barbershop joins a portfolio of Casa Pueblo’s energy projects at the
point of consumption that work directly with people and businesses. In just a
few months after María, we had equipped ten homes in the rural community
of El Hoyo with backup systems for medical equipment such as dialysis and
respiratory machines. We addressed food safety with over fifty solar
refrigerators installed in residences in all neighborhoods throughout the
municipality, and five grocery stores now operate with solar energy. The
groceries, which represent the first line of food defense for the community,
are strategically located in the neighborhoods of Guilarte, La Olimpia, Vegas
Abajo, Tanamá, and Garzas. In terms of education and entertainment, a solar
lounge was established in the Bosque Escuela, and the first solar cinema in
Puerto Rico was completed in April 2018. We also established the first fully
solar radio transmitter and provided solar power to two hardware stores, sixty
homes (which neighbors call the cucubanos, or fireflies), houses with
peritoneal dialysis needs, a young worker’s first lechonera (restaurant that
serves roasted pork), and even a pizzeria, El Campo es Leña.
    The hardware stores are expected to pass on their energy bill savings onto
the community by offering reduced-priced, energy-efficient products for their
customers. Supermarkets are asked to control their prices, not to close their
operations, to offer better-quality food, and to serve as energy oases in the
same way that Casa Pueblo has done for our people. Those who received
solar refrigerators from Casa Pueblo promised to help their neighbors, and
the barber promised to lower his rates. This is a model of change that
leverages new resources to promote collective social responsibility.
    Meanwhile, we have been working with professors and students from the
University of Michigan on innovation to diversify energy sources and
develop hybrid systems for an energy microgrid. The plan? To integrate
agricultural biomass with vegetative residues to generate hydrogen at night
and combine it with a daytime photovoltaic system.


  IN SEARCH OF ENERGY INDEPENDENCE FOR PUERTO RICO

At a time when the central government lacks a clear vision for the future or it
is being driven by external agendas, Casa Pueblo and many other groups and
communities are advocating solar-power projects throughout the island.
Where consensus seems to emerge is on maximizing local energy resources
and on replacing an outdated model in which, shamefully, only 0.41 percent
of the energy generated is solar. As we move forward, we are advocating a
short-term goal of “50conSOL” by 2027. That is, we want 50 percent of the
country’s energy generation for residential consumption to move to
photovoltaic power by the tenth anniversary of Hurricane María. This would
be the first phase in establishing a 100 percent renewable-energy system. In
advocating this goal, we are also promoting an economic model that creates
savings and benefits for local communities while creating jobs across the
island. Furthermore, these initiatives will build resilience while promoting
economic revitalization by empowering marginalized communities in Puerto
Rico through local control of resources and creating a path to become a clean
energy hub in the Caribbean. Finally, energy self-sufficiency could be our
first step toward decolonization.
1. James B. Elsner, Sarah E. Strazzo, Thomas H. Jagger, Timothy Larow, and Ming
   Zhao, “Sensitivity of Limiting Hurricane Intensity to SST in the Atlantic from
   Observations and GCMs,” Journal of Climate 26 (August 15, 2013): 5949–5957,
   https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00433.1.
                    COMMUNITY KITCHENS

                      An Emerging Movement?

                            Giovanni Roberto

I work at Puerto Rico’s comedores sociales (community kitchens), a social
project where I cook, help with organizational tasks, and promote political
activism. The name comedores sociales comes from the donation-based food
stands that we started in 2013 at the University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras
campus, and other locations throughout Puerto Rico. The group that started
the comedores is socialist, so we critique the capitalist system and try to
create transformative experiences for social change, which include personal
experiences for everyone involved in the project.
    In my case, food and hunger have always been an issue. For many years
my family had to resort to food stamps, which, as we know, help but are not
enough. To have some cash income we sold pigeon peas, ajíes, pumpkins,
mangoes, and anything that grew in the nearby mountainside. My mom
would make pasteles and other things. My dad worked sporadically until his
back was permanently injured and his employment options were even more
limited. In our home, unemployment and self-employment were the norm.
    My political awakening occurred with the historic events of the late
1990s, including the Huelga del Pueblo (People’s Strike) of 1998, the release
of Puerto Rican political prisoners in 1999, and the intense struggle against
the US Navy’s presence on the island of Vieques.1 These were historic,
collective events I experienced in my individual context of being from Puerto
Rico’s montaña region, of being hungry, and of living in poverty.
    This is why I was forever convinced that we must construct different
social, political, and economic systems, ones that would replace capitalism
and all its practices of exclusion.2 In Puerto Rico global capitalism manifests
itself through the direct political control that the United States exercises over
us in Congress. The capitalism that oppresses us here is a colonial system,
and this is why our struggle for a better life is always independentista
(proindependence) and anticolonial.
    This kind of domination often leads to ideological musings like “What
would we be without the United States?,” “We are better off than any other
Latin American republic,” and “If we become independent, will we die of
hunger?”


                        A PERSONAL JOURNEY

At the end of 2012, I was depressed and disoriented. My mood was
perturbed, and I needed to reinvent myself. Quitting my teaching job at an
alternative school was simple in comparison to deciding what to do with my
life.
     I eventually found the psychiatrist Efren Ramírez, who takes a holistic
approach to mental illness. Even though he can prescribe pharmaceutical
medications, he bases his practice on nutrition, including the consumption of
natural lithium as a supplement to the process of personal development.
Ramírez defended the idea that life can be lived through “mutual help and
self-effort” in the search for meaning, which is possible with organization,
nutrition, and community service, among other things.
     His method made sense to me, and I immediately started to improve. I
started making different decisions, and they had a ripple effect. At the
sessions with Ramírez, I would share only the things I was doing to feel
better, not my problems or things that made me sad. It was a way to focus on
the search for solutions and to implement alternatives to meet life’s
challenges.
     My mom, Guillermina Caez, who is also a founder of comedores sociales
and one of its longtime cooks, was diagnosed with cancer in 2012. Her
treatment was luckily simple and short because it was detected early. Her
illness and recuperation influenced her diet and mine. Along with Ramírez’s
healing program, her illness made me rethink the role of food in human
physical and social development.
     The first food tables I set up, in 2013, were meant to accompany the
political work I was doing with the International Socialist Organization
(ISO);3 I established the comedor from the perspective of organizing, which
was what most interested me as an activist. To my surprise, in less than a year
the food tables came to substitute for the political organizing, confronting us
with another dimension of political work that we hadn’t thought about before.
It also presented me with a dimension of my purpose in life, one that I hadn’t
integrated into my political practice: the struggle against hunger and scarcity.


            POLITICAL AND COLLECTIVE SOLIDARITY

The first tables sold a meal for four dollars or whatever people could manage.
We also accepted donations and help. Because of the life I have lived, I
dislike how money limits people. When distributing food, I didn’t want
money to be a limitation. Since the work I did at the tables was done with my
mom’s help from the beginning, receiving help with the tables was very
important. If someone donated some rice or a can of beans, it was greatly
appreciated, and we gave them a plate of food. Little by little, through our
interactions with people, we developed our “system of three contributions”:
in exchange for meals, people can give the comedor money, a donation in
kind, or volunteer labor. The starting point was always an antisystemic
political perspective.
    Tensions quickly ran high, and the university made it clear just how
radical our actions were. The authorities of UPR Cayey tried to stop us, at the
request of the manager of Fazaa Food Service, the private administrators of
the university cafeteria, various times without success. Thus, the state and a
private enterprise joined forces to oppose a food stand that gave away at most
twenty meals a week to students who could barely afford a monetary
donation. In time, I was issued a fine, but our accountant was able to get it
removed. On another occasion the campus security tried, unsuccessfully, to
force us to stop giving out the meals.
    At the UPR Río Piedras campus, campus security guards once blocked
the food tables with their bodies. Now it was the state practicing a peaceful
protest against a civilian student initiative. The security guards, most of
whom were obviously embarrassed, stood there to stop the distribution of the
solidarity meals. After a while the rector at that time ordered the guards to
leave. On another occasion the dean of the School of Business
Administration cut off access to the water supply. And every now and then a
new, cocky security guard would block the entrance for the comedores’ car to
deliver the food that was to be served that day. But unlike at UPR Cayey, the
administration at UPR Río Piedras has always been open to regulating our
project.
    We at the ISO undertook the comedores sociales as part of our political
work while also establishing the Centro para el Desarrollo Politico, Educativo
y Cultural (Center for Political, Educational, and Cultural Development),4 a
nonprofit that we created in 2012 to promote experiences of change. In time,
there grew among us a division between those who were undertaking the
comedor and the ISO’s student members who were oriented toward protest
and movements.
    Every attack from the administrators or the UPR strengthened our protest
with food tables and gave us political experience. This is how we took on the
name comedores sociales, and we explained the project’s objectives in
writing to the UPR authorities: we fed solidarity as we built a nonprofit
organization dedicated to constructing long-term experiences of change for
people. When we were questioned about our “business,” we responded that it
was in sync with the model of nonprofits: we accepted donations, materials,
and volunteer labor. In any case, if the person could not provide any of the
three types of donation, they ate anyway, making our project more one of free
distribution. Yet we organize around solidarity, not charity. This is why we
established flexible donation methods, including receiving a meal without a
donation. This allows us to present a relationship distinct from that of the
traditional customer-seller. We are in effect meal providers but with the goal
of consolidating social ties and building community. The funds we receive
pay rent and other operational expenses, including for personnel who work
on the project.


                       GROWTH IN THE CRISIS

The past years have been particularly difficult for political movements that
look to improve people’s living conditions—difficult for the
proindependence, socialist, and labor movements. Framed by the global crisis
and debt, the upper class is waging a head-on war with the working class.
The principal effects are obvious: the destruction of public service, the
increase and consolidation of unemployment, and a high levels of migration.
No one seems to be able to escape these effects.
    Sadly, our comedores sociales are serving a lot of people because hunger
grows in parallel to the crisis. A person who came to eat told me that he eats
lunch at the comedores, goes to a Christian soup kitchen in the late afternoon
for dinner, and asks his neighbor for food every now and then to survive the
week. Someone else told me about the university students, “People think they
are going hungry very often. You go to their fridge in the dorms, and there is
absolutely nothing there.” This is more common than one would think.
    Comedores sociales are expanding around the island. There are now
comedores at UPR’s campuses in Ponce, Arecibo, and Humacao, as well as at
the Universidad de Sagrado Corazón. In December 2015, we held the first
island-wide meeting of the comedores sociales. In 2017, just when UPR
Mayagüez was ready to start theirs, Hurricane María struck.


             MUTUAL AID AFTER HURRICANE MARÍA

Comedores sociales had always been a precarious initiative, so when María
hit Puerto Rico, all we had was food. What luck! We had collected provisions
at the beginning of September to “have a strong start to the semester,” and
these provisions became the initial food for the comedor social comunitario,
as part of the Centro de Apoyo Mutuo (CAM), which we founded together
with the collective Urbe a Pie5 and an army of volunteers, to address food
scarcity in the aftermath of the hurricane. We used the “three donations”
model to invite people to “not only receive a meal but to construct something
long term.” Since we knew that after a natural and social disaster, “disaster
capitalism” would follow, and with it the attempts of the system to reestablish
itself, we wanted our initiative to have as little governmental intervention as
possible.
    In this way, the CAM counted on the support of the very same people in
the food lines and our fellow Puerto Ricans living abroad who were quick to
send nonperishable food, medical supplies, electric generators, and solar light
bulbs, among other things.
    Somehow the hurricanes made the government’s negligence clear—the
well-being of the general population wasn’t the government’s priority, but the
system of riches and wealth surely was. Even with the ports loaded with
gasoline and merchandise, the government limited its distribution. During the
first weeks, hundreds of truckers offered to work for free with no success.
Since money was the motivation, not quickly reestablishing national electric
power, the government waited and handed out shady contracts costing
millions of dollars to the Whitefish company. Our government hid the
number of deaths as a consequence of Hurricanes Irma and María to impress
the US government while they were leading a hidden campaign in favor of
annexing Puerto Rico to the US. While people were dying for lack of medical
attention, our politicians were scrambling for loans, contracts, and political
positions.
     During the days right after María hit, and in the weeks and months to
follow, it was the dozens of brigades, the comedores sociales, the
independent medical efforts, the artistic presentations, and help from people
in our country and from abroad that lifted up Puerto Rico.
     The idea of centro de apoyo mutuo was embraced by different sectors in
Puerto Rico that established similar centers in various towns. From Las
Marias and Lares to Humacao and Vieques, different initiatives called
themselves centros de apoyo mutuo to insist on a kind of dependency and
assistance that is promoted by the state and its agencies. The call to construct
something else keeps opening the way to more grassroots work with people.
     This is how the comedores sociales found themselves involved in
initiating other social community kitchens, like the one in Yabucoa with the
support of the Centro de Desarrollo Político, Educativo y Cultural (CDPEC)
and the Centro de Apoyo de Las Carolinas, a community in Caguas that has
provided meals and other services to its residents since 2017. To strengthen
relationships among each of the centros de apoyo and other similar
initiatives, we created a network called the Red de Apoyo Mutuo (Mutual
Support Network), which continues to do important grassroots work.


              AN EMERGING POLITICAL MOVEMENT

Our comedores sociales model sustainable mutual aid in the area of feeding
people, and the model is growing to become applicable for work in many
other areas. A diversity of centers oriented toward satisfying social needs
have been started in Puerto Rico over the last years, even before Hurricane
María.
     There is the Centro de Estudio Transdisciplinario para la Agroecología
(Transdisciplinary Study Center for Agroecology) in Lares and the theatrical
initiative of a home-based workshop Colectivo Columpio in the town of
Camuy. There is also the Consejo Integral Comunitario de la Barriada
Morales, which empowers and assists the community residents.
     Ecological and agricultural projects are very prominent within an
ecosystem of concrete alternatives. The return to agriculture and organic
farming is the rising social tendency most important to consider for a political
change in Puerto Rico over the next decade.
     More than a movement, the comedores sociales are emerging in Puerto
Rico as a political movement orbiting around satisfying basic needs. These
initiatives can multiply because they respond to concrete necessities and are
very easily reproduced. These initiatives are sustained by their own
resources, private donations, or literally the passing of a hat. Instead of
depending on the state, the federal government, or corporations, these
initiatives “depend” on their own people. The direct connection to the people
at the base is the calling card of these social and political projects directed at
daily life. The crisis has proved to be an opportunity.
     Sooner or later the crisis would have generated a collective response
much like ours in the area of people’s need for meals, as it would also
generate other responses we don’t know of. The crisis will make the
initiatives and actions that respond to the needs of the people successful.
     For the vigorous development of antisystemic politics in Puerto Rico, we
need to be anchored in social projects just as the Black Panthers6 and the
Young Lords were in the United States. These organizations protested the
government for its systematic abuse, but they also organized the resistance to
capitalism every day.
     These projects increase collective confidence and effectively demonstrate
that we can do things better at the base. The work done to increase self-
esteem, transmit confidence, and project hope can’t be underestimated in
Puerto Rico, because we are a country whose collective psyche has been
pounded on by colonialism.
     Our social projects have the virtue of creating new experiences of
exchange and of human relations. They can help us overcome the fear about
our survival and our political future sown into us generation after generation.
“With independence we will die of hunger” is what people think and say, but
with colonial capitalism we are dying now. An antiestablishment political
movement has to be developed—one whose objective is to organize with the
people at the base to concretize alternatives to the crisis. We need to fight the
old world and construct a new one.
     It works. One day at the comedor social, a guest asked how much the
meal cost, and we responded, “The suggested donation is five dollars, but you
can give what you can.” She laughed at first, and then we noticed that it was
from the surprise. She insistently asked, “But how much do I have to give?”
And we said five dollars if you have it, to which she responded, “What do
you mean ‘if I have it’?” If I don’t have it, then I don’t have to pay?” We
made it clear that if she ever didn’t have money and needed to eat, she could
come and help in another way, such as by giving a hand or doing some
dishes. She gave us the five dollars and walked away. She kept coming the
whole semester.
     We don’t have to ask about someone’s politics because the comedor itself
is a filter. If the person isn’t solidary and does not want the best for others,
we probably don’t know each other. If they don’t believe that people
organizing can make changes, they probably won’t trust our new projects
because these projects do not operate under the existing authorities, and so
they don’t consider us legitimate. Profound change takes time.
     This is why I have faith in future struggles. Generating change means
generating a movement for modifying the paradigms of political functions.
This is how our projects are simultaneously nourished by the crisis and are
radicalized as a result of it.
     Even though young people and women stand out, these projects of daily
life integrate all kinds of people. Above all, the participation of the elderly is
vital and indispensable in agroecological projects. All share the strong
connection between the issues of health, culture, and general well-being.
     The movement that we need to put into action, a project of national
liberation, will be enriched by a combination of political struggle against the
state and the short-term construction of concrete alternatives. We are doing it.
We have to keep sowing.
1. The Huelga del Pueblo of 1998 was a series of protests, walkouts, and strikes against
   the privatization of the national phone service. It included a two-day general strike in
   all of Puerto Rico during the summer. Twelve political prisoners were released after
   nineteen years of imprisonment after an intense campaign and popular support. In 2010
   Carlos Alberto Torres was released, and Oscar López Rivera in 2017. Vieques is an
   island municipality of Puerto Rico, invaded and occupied by the US Navy since 1945.
   After the death of a civilian, David Sanes, during military practices in 1999, the protest
   against the navy demanded an end to the bombing practices and the closing of the
   naval base. The struggle expanded until the navy base finally closed in 2003.
2. I was a militant member of the Organización Socialista Internacional (OSI) from 2000
   until its end in 2014. This experience gave way to the creation of Centro para el
   Desarrollo Político, Educativo y Cultura (CDPEC), the Comedores Sociales de Puerto
   Rico, and other projects.
3. The ISO was a Marxist organization and defender of “socialism from below,” the idea
   that an organized working class can and should run society. In 2013 there were two
   main branches, in Cayey and Río Piedras.
4. Comedores Sociales de Puerto Rico was initially a Project of CDPEC. For more
   information, visit www.cdpecpr.org.
5. Urbe a Pie is a collective that works for the social and economic development of the
   traditional town area of Caguas. They have a variety projects, such as Huerto Feliz,
   Boutique Comunitaria, Galería de Arte Comunitario, and Café Teatro El Reflejo.
6. The Black Panther Party was a Black nationalist, socialist, and revolutionary
   organization in the United States from 1966 to 1982. Its militants were involved in
   “survival programs” that served breakfast to children, gave clothes in the winter, and
   kept watch in the barrios for white police.
    BUILDING ACCOUNTABILITY AND SECURE
                 FUTURES

              An Interview with Mari Mari Narváez

                            Marisol LeBrón

Mari Mari Narváez is the founder and executive director of Kilómetro 0
(Kilometer Zero), an organization that fights state repression and violence
against citizens. Growing out of the work of the citizen accountability group
Espacios Abiertos (Open Spaces), which was established in 2014, Kilómetro
0 has been at the forefront of the struggle to make the state, especially the
Puerto Rico Police Department, more transparent and accountable to the
people of Puerto Rico. In particular, Kilómetro 0 has been dedicated to
reducing instances of police harassment, violence, and lethality, while
working with the public to gather stories of police misconduct and increase
awareness about people’s rights when confronted by the police.
    Mari Narváez has been a fixture of progressive politics in Puerto Rico for
more than two decades as a journalist and social commentator for a range of
publications, including Claridad, El Nuevo Día, and 80 Grados. Along with
Sofía Irene Cardona, Ana Teresa Pérez Leroux, and Vanessa Vilches Norat,
she published the books Del desorden habitual de las cosas (Capicúa, 2015)
and Fuera del quicio (Santillana, 2008). She is also the coauthor of Palabras
en libertad: Entrevistas a los ex-prisioneros políticos puertorriqueños
(Editorial Claridad, 2000).
    In this interview, she discusses how she came to political consciousness
and began organizing around human rights in Puerto Rico. She discusses the
political landscape before Hurricane María and how protests against the
imposition of PROMESA and the Fiscal Control Board were met with intense
state surveillance and police repression. For Mari Mari Narváez, Hurricane
María and its aftershocks present new challenges and opportunities for social
justice advocates and organizers in Puerto Rico. While Hurricane María and
the storm of willful neglect and austerity that followed created new urgencies
in the lives of many Puerto Ricans, which often makes taking to the streets to
protest difficult, she points out that the storm has also ripped away the facade
of democratic governance and revealed the realities of colonialism in Puerto
Rico that can spur renewed political consciousness and organizing.
Ultimately, Narváez suggests that a true recovery for Puerto Ricans living
with the aftershocks of Hurricane María means building community
capacities and working toward community control of the institutions that
govern our lives.

MARISOL LEBRÓN. As a journalist and an activist, you’ve long been
concerned with social justice issues and the struggle for human rights in
Puerto Rico. Can you tell us a little bit about your political journey and how
you became involved with efforts to create greater police accountability?

MARI MARI NARVÁEZ. Although I was raised in a family of activists, I
never really meant to be one. I had wanted to be a journalist and a writer
since I was an adolescent. Writing was and still is my greatest love. But when
you think of about it, what are journalism and writing if not forms of
activism, right? I began my journalistic career in Claridad, when I was
twenty years old. A few years later, I was writing opinion columns in both
Claridad and El Nuevo Día as well as working for different nonprofit
organizations in Puerto Rico. So, writing about so many urgent social and
cultural issues, I guess I slowly and unwillingly became an activist. I still
struggle with it because I envisioned myself writing fiction stories and living
a more peaceful life. Of course, that’s just not going to happen ever,
apparently. The times we are living are far more complicated than I ever
expected.
    My most life-changing political awakening was relatively late in life, in
my late twenties. It happened in 2005, when the FBI arrived in Puerto Rico,
formed a perimeter around Filiberto Ojeda Ríos’s house, and killed him. Of
course, I was already politically conscious and had long worked as a
journalist. I had grown up between protests in the proindependence
movement. But something happened that day, and it had to do with a vital
and productive outrage. The human rights struggle got very personal for me.
Filiberto’s assassination changed me radically. Whatever I didn’t fully “get”
before about our political and colonial condition, I understood from that day
on. And I knew I had to be more politically involved. Writing was powerful
and efficient, but it was not enough. It was since that day that I felt the fire
burning, and I still do. With time, things in Puerto Rico have only gotten
worse from a colonial and socioeconomic stance, so my rage since September
23, 2005, has proved fruitful. I also had the privilege of working with great
nonprofit organizations from which I learned and gathered so much. One
thing led to another.

MARISOL LEBRÓN. There is a long history of the police working as a tool
of political repression in Puerto Rico, a history with which you are intimately
familiar. How do you understand the role of the police in Puerto Rico?

MARI MARI NARVÁEZ. My family has been ideologically persecuted by
the police most of our lives. Before I was born, in 1976, my brother Santiago
Mari Pesquera was killed in a political assassination in San Juan. A group of
extremist Cuban exiles was involved in the crime’s planning and execution,
and the Puerto Rico Police participated, at the very least, in the cover-up.
More than thirty years later, declassified documents from the FBI revealed
that Cuban exiles had a plan to kill my father and the FBI knew it. Back then,
my father, Juan Mari Brás, was a prominent political leader in Puerto Rico
running for governor as the head of Partido Socialista Puertorriqueño, an
anticolonial, socialist, and secessionist movement. Five months later, my
brother was killed.
    Of course, my family is not the only one whose members were killed,
persecuted, incarcerated, and blacklisted. In the 1980s civil rights litigation
revealed that the police had illegally created political files to surveil
dissidents, affecting the lives, jobs, and relations of anyone who protested or
was even minimally involved in any progressive movement in Puerto Rico.
Hundreds of people have been killed and thousands have been incarcerated or
persecuted because of political repression and colonialism in Puerto Rico.
    When I was twenty years old and became a journalist, I again
encountered the police, this time in the social protests I was covering, where
they would abuse protesters and journalists alike with excessive force, by
intimidating people and repeatedly using tear gas against us.
     I have no doubt that self-determination, as well as political and social
progress in Puerto Rico, has been stalled, mainly, by the systematic use of
repression. Specifically, police repression. But this not only applies to
activists. It applies to underserved communities, which sometimes in a
lifetime might not receive decent basic services from the state, but do receive
the mano dura (iron fist), the discriminatory vigilance, the targeted abuse,
and human rights violations from the police. This also pushes back social
progress. These are some of the reasons why, since 2014, I have been
dedicated to learning about, investigating, pursuing, and advocating for
police accountability in Puerto Rico, first from Espacios Abiertos, a nonprofit
in Puerto Rico, and now from Kilómetro 0, an organization I recently
founded with their support.

MARISOL LEBRÓN. Two of the organizations you’ve worked with in a
leadership capacity, Espacios Abiertos and Kilómetro 0, have had
transparency and access to information at the core of their mission. Why is
this so central to the work of transforming the relationship between the police
and the people of Puerto Rico?

MARI MARI NARVÁEZ. The Puerto Rican government is and has always
been extremely secretive and hermetic, even though we Puerto Rican
residents have a constitutional right to access information. Historically,
human rights activists, environmental leaders, and freedom fighters have
been bold, wise, and intuitive enough to find out much of what has been
hidden. But transparency is one of the main pillars of a democracy, and the
lack of it in Puerto Rico has caused us so much pain. When establishing the
great root causes of our current crisis, most people focus on colonialism,
which is obvious and irrefutable. But the lack of transparency is not
inextricably linked to colonialism, and it has framed our political culture. The
paradox is that this happened while both the US and Puerto Rican
government officials perpetrated this narrative that presented Puerto Rico as a
highly democratic and even model country. This was all such a shameless
fraud, as we never created even the minimum basis for a culture of access to
information, a culture of transparency, which are, again, vital elements of a
democracy.
    As an activist, I can say that I spend at least half of my work time fighting
for the unknown, all sorts of data and information that the government does
not provide. For example, police use-of-force documentation, the number,
information, and circumstances of people killed, mutilated, or seriously
injured by the police. Requesting and fighting for this information takes a lot
of any activist’s workload. And we don’t even have a mechanism to access
information. It is very common to ask an agency for information and not
receive anything back or receive very poor, aggregated data. Your only
options then are (1) giving up on the data and using whatever other
information you can find on your own or (2) suing the agency, which is not
something everybody can do. It is way too onerous to make data-based
decisions and do advocacy work in Puerto Rico. This is a very basic element
of creating a democracy.

MARISOL LEBRÓN. Before the hurricane, there seemed to be widespread
dissatisfaction with PROMESA and the imposition of the Fiscal Control
Board. All around Puerto Rico, but especially in the San Juan metropolitan
area, there were many demonstrations and actions against the proposed
solutions to the debt crisis. How would you describe the political climate
before María struck? How did the government respond to the surge of
activism against the new austerity regime being implemented?

MARI MARI NARVÁEZ. The government responded with a level of
repression that I believe we had not seen in a very long time. Decades maybe.
Never in my life did I think I would be living under a similar repressive
environment as my parents did. Fifteen years ago, I thought all that had been
left in the past. I was very wrong. Repression is awful for many reasons,
especially the way it discourages people to exercise their freedoms. Very bad
things have happened to people who protest during the last few years,
especially the young. That’s bad and sad and terrible, but a lot of people
don’t get intimidated and that’s also inspiring. What really seems terrifying,
however, is the way that the world’s capital controls governments and a
country’s destiny, just like that. In Puerto Rico, both the Puerto Rican and US
governments and the Fiscal Control Board went to great lengths to assure that
the board’s decisions could find a relatively easy execution path. Police
repression, as well as their protection of private interests, has been a central
part of this plan.
    The federal government, as always, has had a leading role in this climate
of repression, and if there’s any doubt, just look at what they have done with
Nina Droz. Droz left her house on May 1, 2017, to protest the violent
austerity measures that are killing our country, and almost two years later,
she has not returned. She was denied bail and was unjustly incarcerated using
an eccentric theory about a “terrorist organization” that they supposedly
investigated and is “linked” to this case. A completely crazy theory and
everyone knows it. She has been tortured, intimidated, and denied medical
attention, and her dignity has been violated continuously. The federal
prosecution incarcerated her as a cruel exhibition punishment for all other
protesters. And they do it because they know that the only thing that can
really threaten their economic exploitation plans are social mobilizations.
Protests and protesters can change the course of things.

MARISOL LEBRÓN. How did María change things? Did it make organizing
against the debt more difficult? Increase its importance?

MARI MARI NARVÁEZ. It has been a strange and extraordinary time.
Some aspects are better now, some are more difficult. The fact that the
hurricane unveiled our poverty, our structural and political fragility, has been
somewhat positive as more people have been able to understand the mortal
effects of austerity measures and the relationship between corruption,
capitalist exploitation, the debt, and our vulnerability, our current daily
situation. The media attention on Puerto Rico, especially due to Donald
Trump and the federal government’s discrimination and failure to respond in
Puerto Rico, has also brought a new level of philanthropic capital that we did
not have before. That has facilitated things for certain NGOs and advocacy
organizations, very few of them actually, but most of them are organizations
with impact, leverage, and a proven capacity and commitment. That has been
positive.
    On the other hand, a lot of people are still dealing with the aftermath of
the hurricane. And when you don’t have a house, for example; when you
have an already difficult economic situation that worsens because of the lack
of work or the effects of austerity measures; when you’re in a bad situation
and your children’s schools close, and you might have lost your car in the
hurricane or maybe you lost your support network because your family
moved to the states—you cannot think of mobilizing against the debt or for
police accountability or whatever. Many people are immersed in an extreme
economic and social situation, and this makes it very hard for them to
advocate for their rights. In some instances, advocating for human rights
becomes a privilege and that is tragic.

MARISOL LEBRÓN. After the storm, we saw the deployment of military
forces to clear debris, engage in “peacekeeping,” and help with the
distribution of aid. Some people saw this as the militarization of necessary
humanitarian relief efforts, while others suggested that the military were the
only ones capable of properly distributing aid and keeping the streets safe in
the aftermath of María. What was your reaction to seeing this increased
military presence?

MARI MARI NARVÁEZ. I think that, unfortunately, we in Puerto Rico are
used to seeing the military often. Of course, it was more dramatic in the
aftermath of the hurricane. You’d even see them right in the middle of the
highway, just standing there in their huge vehicles, sometimes doing
absolutely nothing. I’m not super proud about saying this, but I didn’t have
much of a reaction to the militarization. I guess we’re used to that. I think the
military presence in the streets didn’t feel as awful and overwhelming as it
did in Haiti after the earthquake, for example. I was there, and I had a much
more visceral reaction to it there than in Puerto Rico.
    But those days after the hurricane were very blurry. They were a
suspended time. We had so much to do and to worry about, from basic things
like finding drinking water to more complicated things like getting to the
countryside to bring help or dealing with each other’s losses. I wasn’t as
disturbed with the military presence as I was with the imposed curfew, for
example. And, of course, with the general chaos, especially the lack of diesel.
Knowing that diesel trucks were arriving at mansions and rich people’s
buildings but not to the hospitals angered me and freaked me out. You just
couldn’t believe that was happening. I knew we couldn’t afford to end up in a
hospital, so I was constantly thinking about how we could stay safe and
healthy.
    Even when I was very disturbed by the curfew, I didn’t do something
about it right away. I couldn’t. We were engaged in emergency labor and, as I
said, dealing with our own personal chaos. But in November, I began to
discuss it with different activists and communicators. By December 2017, a
group of organizations and activists had already mobilized and created a
report on the human rights violations during the emergency management. We
had an audience at the Interamerican Commission of Human Rights in
Washington, DC. In that report, we analyzed and discussed the curfew,
among many other issues. A lawyer who participated convinced me that the
curfew had been illegal, and I kept thinking about it. Finally, when the
hurricane’s anniversary date was arriving, I realized we had to go back and
hold the conversation we had been unable to have before: the conversation
about the illegal curfew that was imposed on us. At that time, I had already
founded Kilómetro 0, and we created an awareness campaign called Mi
Candado Lo Tranco Yo (I Lock the Padlock Myself). We brought this
message about how fundamental rights such as the right to move had been
needlessly violated in our faces, why it was illegal, and why we had to
reaffirm to ourselves that “mi candado lo tranco yo.” I saw it as a powerful
message of self-determination. Yes, we are colonial subjects. Yes, there are
many decisions about ourselves that we cannot make. But at the very least,
we should all be able to determine when we close our own doors and
padlocks. This is a fundamental freedom and basic right of self-
determination.
    We also highlighted the story of a woman named Ana Luisa Nieto who
died because her dialysis center was closed due to the curfew; and the story
of Aníbal Martínez Centeno, a man who was illegally arrested at a gas station
during the curfew and spent the night in jail.1 And we underlined the fact that
Aníbal was a working-class Black man. We tried to explain why the curfew
was illegal and discriminatory, and we did it in the spirit of a conversation
that you cannot leave pending, no matter how much time has passed. It was
important to say, “OK, at that moment we couldn’t do much for so many
reasons. But we have to talk about what happened here, about the illegality of
this curfew, about how it violated one of our fundamental freedoms and why
we cannot let this happen again.”
MARISOL LEBRÓN. The storm put on full display the many ways that
people and communities find themselves vulnerable to violence and harm in
Puerto Rico. Groups that were vulnerable to violence before the storm found
themselves even more so after it. There were reports that women and LGBTQ
people were experiencing higher rates of harm after María and that the police
were largely ineffective in addressing this violence. Why do you think we
saw this uptick of violence after the storm, and why has policing failed to
protect these groups?

MARI MARI NARVÁEZ. The police have always failed to protect these
groups, and that is one of the reasons why they are facing a reform process.
These safety problems were fully predictable. Organizations that work with
these groups knew that a hurricane-like situation would generate threats
against these vulnerable groups, and they anticipated it. It was not a mystery
or a surprise. How can you, government, not know that domestic violence
victims, for example, would find themselves incommunicadas and unable to
report their aggressors? How can you not anticipate that shelters needed to
have protocols for sexual aggression complaints, for protecting trans people
and women’s rights? These things are obvious, and the police failed to attend
to them because there is no institutional will to do so. Their only vision is the
punitive and remedial one. When the crime or the violation is committed,
they might step in (if they find the resources to do so). But they had no plan
for prevention. And it’s not like this was the first hurricane that ever affected
Puerto Rico, so there is absolutely no legitimate explanation for these
failures.

MARISOL LEBRÓN. There have been reports that the police have harassed
and repressed community groups and organizations that stepped in to aid in
recovery after María. Why are we starting to see these groups, which were
celebrated in the aftermath of the storm, suddenly become targets?

MARI MARI NARVÁEZ. It doesn’t surprise me. As I mentioned earlier,
there is ample evidence that, in previous years, the police had been
accumulating intelligence on demonstrators, political leaders, community
leaders, and even lawyers. Those lawyers who participate in the defense of
protesters are constantly harassed and persecuted.
    Environmental activist Arturo Massol Deyá was selectively arrested in
July 2018, and the police fabricated a case against him after having made
some demands before a delegation of Democratic congressmen in Adjuntas,
Puerto Rico. Massol and the organization he directs, Casa Pueblo, are some
of the strongest voices in favor of renewable energy in Puerto Rico and
against the gasification plan of the island’s energy system after the
devastation of Hurricane María.
    These are only some of the intimidations directed toward human rights
defenders. The police have accessed the documents and personal information
of thousands of people who have participated in, commented on, or interacted
with certain Facebook pages, through a judicial preservation order in a case
of April 27, 2017. The amount of data that they have accumulated and that
they can accumulate through the Facebook platform is worrisome, and we all
need to be aware of the implications of these new modes of surveillance and
their relation to the collection of files on and repression of dissidents.

MARISOL LEBRÓN. Has Hurricane María caused you to shift or rethink
how you approach questions of police reform and accountability? In your
work with Kilómetro 0, are there new challenges or issues that you’re dealing
with that you didn’t anticipate?

MARI MARI NARVÁEZ. I think the experiences we had during and after
the hurricane made us reflect on every aspect of our lives and work. One of
the things I’ve most had to rethink and try to reframe is the labor and
emotional conditions in which police officers are working. Police unions
have long been reporting that their members have very low morale. Police
officers, just like teachers and social workers and so many other workers,
have been hit very hard by austerity; many of them are leaving the agency,
and others seem to feel very betrayed. I’ve heard at least one of their leaders
say they have done the job of repressing protesters and protecting the Fiscal
Board but have not gotten their due. Of course, I think this rationale is
noxious, but to understand the consequences of austerity in the different
sectors, I have to understand this frustrating way of thinking. This situation
concerns me for too many reasons. First, the low morale has different
negative effects. On the one hand, many people agree that police officials are
dragging their feet. This means they are not performing their job properly. On
the other hand, I also suspect they might be less motivated to abide to the
new use-of-force policies. It concerns me very deeply that, by mid-February,
the police in Puerto Rico had already killed at least four people. At least one
of those was an unarmed man, and another one is said to have been unarmed,
although the police say he was not. Another one was armed with a machete
and the police responded by killing him. To us, that number seems pretty
high for such a short time. I get the feeling that they are acting like saving
lives is not worth the risk. They shoot first, then find out if the person was
armed. This, added to the fact that accountability mechanisms within the
agency are not yet put in place, is extremely dangerous for our democratic
and equitable aspirations, as well as for our safety.
    This austerity narrative has also led most people to accept a questionable
discourse of how the lack of police officers is fueling insecurity. It concerns
me that even progressive people are assuming this narrative without
consulting the data on it or questioning its assumptions. Do we really need so
many police officers? Why? The reality is that we used to have a huge police
force of almost eighteen thousand. We now have about ten thousand, but we
have also lost a lot of population. We are studying the situation, and although
we don’t yet have a complete analysis, we have not found any truth in the
idea that we have too few police officers.

MARISOL LEBRÓN. What does recovery for Puerto Rico mean to you?
How do you see that influencing your work moving forward?

MARI MARI NARVÁEZ. For me, recovery is the opportunity to break:
break with our past dependencies, with our pervasive culture of inequity. I
wish we could take advantage of this terrible situation to acknowledge that
we need to build a more horizontal society, a place for everyone to live and
work and love in. This is not an idealistic thought. It is an inclusive,
compassionate, human rights perspective. Human rights are pretty
fundamental, and exercising them is possible.
    In the security aspect, I aspire to build a society where we don’t need
thousands and thousands of police officers. I aspire to a society that
approaches safety as something much bigger than just the police or a Taser or
firearms. Safety is about health, about a right to safe housing, peace, and
tranquility, about women being able to live and walk in the streets without
being raped or harassed. It is living in a community whose health and safety
is not threatened by coal ash or other environmental contamination. Safety is
having access to clean water, to a high-quality public education, access to
culture, and access to a job. To accomplish all that, we need to make the state
and its police accountable, to keep police repression and excessive use of
force in check. In the world that I aspire to live in, institutions do not control
people. It is the contrary. People must control their institutions.
1. Mari Mari Narváez, “Mi candado lo tranco yo,” Kilómetro 0, September 20, 2018,
   https://www.kilometro0.org/blog-desde-
   cero/2018/9/19/ov6mdpl5nknzg3c93lf26dj46iekuc.
                             AFTERWORD

 Critique and Decoloniality in the Face of Crisis, Disaster,
                    and Catastrophe

                      Nelson Maldonado-Torres

This book offers reflections and creative work that seek to clarify the
meaning and significance of Hurricane María, the context in which it took
place, and its aftermath in Puerto Rico. While doing so, it uses a trio of
related terms that contribute to contemporary Caribbean decolonial thought
and to decolonial thought in general. These terms are crisis, disaster, and
catastrophe. While these terms are sometimes used interchangeably in
descriptions of anticipated or unanticipated devastation, each has a specific
meaning that is worth considering.
     One reason for exploring in more depth than usual the meanings of crisis,
disaster, and catastrophe is that one can obtain a more precise sense of the
extent and depth of various forms of devastation and destruction, as well as
of different ways of responding to them. One way of responding to events
such as Hurricane María is critique. Critique is important because it indicates
a shift from considering a crisis, disaster, or catastrophe as a natural event to
approaching it instead as connected to human intervention or sociohistorical
forces. All the reflections and creative work in this volume share a common
view that Hurricane María was not simply a natural event and that
understanding it and explaining it require the consideration of ideologies,
attitudes, and social, economic, and political systems, among other factors.
While these tasks cannot be underestimated, it is doubtful that critique itself,
even in more developed forms, provides an appropriate response to Hurricane
María, its context, and its aftermath. This volume points to both the
importance and the limits of critique while it also calls for decolonial
thinking. A closer look at the meanings of crisis, disaster, and catastrophe
sheds light on this point.
    Crisis, disaster, and catastrophe may not, in fact, be as similar as they
seem, and their differences have implications for how we understand the task
of Caribbean thinking. There is a history of links between critique, crisis, and
Eurocentric understandings of the crisis of modernity that is unsettled by
attention to disaster and catastrophe in the Caribbean. One is tempted to say
that—at least in dominant approaches—crisis is to Europe what catastrophe
is for the Caribbean. This does not mean that there are no crises in the
Caribbean, but that any such crisis is likely to be better understood with
reference to catastrophe. Similarly, in European descriptions of European
history, crisis seems to take over catastrophe. Yet the history of the
Caribbean makes clear that Europe cannot so easily disentangle itself from
the catastrophe that is the long presence of colonialism, naturalized slavery,
extractivism, and their aftermath in the Caribbean. This points to the need for
an account of Western modernity as catastrophe instead of, as is more
common, in terms of crisis.
    Crisis is etymologically related to the concept of critique, which is central
in the definition of critical theory. As Reinhart Koselleck explains, both
critique and crisis have roots in the verb krino (whose present active
infinitive form is krinein), which, in classical Greek, has an array of
meanings related to the actions of choosing, judging, and deciding.1 Critique
can be understood as the task of making a judgment, as well as an action that
makes it necessary to make a decision, or that calls for a decision. Crisis, in
turn, refers to a state of affairs that requires a decision because it is no longer
stable. Critique brings about crisis, and crisis requires critique—a judgment
or a decision. For this reason, it is not difficult to understand how both crisis
and critique have been so central in Western modernity. While critique has
been posed as “a genuinely modern disposition,” crisis has been considered
“a genuinely modern and societal and mental state.”2
    In that sense, if this book about Hurricane María were about the critique
and crisis of, say, capitalism, or of the relationship between the United States
and Puerto Rico, it could have been said that the book showed the
“modernity” of its mainly Puerto Rican contributors, and the modernity of
fields such as Puerto Rican or Caribbean studies. But Hurricane María was
not simply a crisis—it was arguably more like a disaster or a catastrophe,
which, upon close examination, are quite different. A crisis is a moment
when decision is needed, while in a disaster it is as if a decision has already
been taken and the outcome revealed. It is as if the moment of decision has
come and gone unnoticed; disaster seems to be the result of fate, as if
something went wrong in the universe.
    This points to the etymology of disaster, which can be easily understood
when considering the Italian term disastro: it refers to an “ill” or “misguided”
star and has also been taken to mean having “ill fortune,” as in “a calamity
blamed on an unfavorable position of a planet.”3 This connection between
disaster and fate indicates why, when disaster happens, the critic appears out
of place while the astrologist and the horoscope tend to get more attention.
References to the crisis of capitalism, the crisis of the market, the crisis of the
humanities, and so on fail to capture the sense of devastation and
hopelessness that disaster tends to bring. This could be read as an error in
judgment, but it arguably also reveals a truth about the limits of critique and
crisis. The more disasters like Hurricane María happen, the more the concept
of crisis will continue showing its limits.
    Another important consideration is that crisis maintains the sense that
something of value can still be rescued, or that something new can emerge
out of a dialectical confrontation of terms. Crisis therefore maintains a view
of the past, its value, and the possibilities of the present, a view that is not
relevant in a context of disaster. Disaster is not as invested in the value of the
past, and it puts in question any notion of a productive dialectic. After a
disaster, silence, laments, and speculation reign. As a result, a gap opens up
within hegemonic discourse, and there emerge provocations to identify and
challenge modernity itself, particularly if the disaster in question occurred in
a place like the Caribbean, the history of which is entangled with the making
and unfolding of Western modernity. This gap and these provocations
become all the more explicit in the context of catastrophe.
    While there is something to gain by referring to Hurricane María as a
disaster instead of merely as a crisis, the most adequate term for it might be
catastrophe. The difference is important. Claudia Aradau and Rens Van
Munster point in the right direction when they argue that “although ‘disaster’
and ‘catastrophe’ are often used interchangeably… catastrophes appear to
bring that undefined extra, an element of ‘un-ness’ that crisis and disaster do
not capture.” Echoing Ulrich Beck, they suggest that “catastrophes are
incalculable, uncontrollable, and ultimately ungovernable. They do not just
seem unmanageable, they are unmanageable.”4
    The distinction between disaster and catastrophe started to become more
significant after Hurricane Katrina.5 For the purposes of this reflection (after
Hurricane María), the distinction between disaster and catastrophe is relevant
to understand the difference between critique and critical theory, on the one
hand, and decolonial thought, creation, and praxis, on the other. Here again
Aradau and Van Munster’s considerations are useful to chart the path:

   The catastrophe to come induces new problematizations and modes of questioning
   that are related but not reducible to problems of dangers, risks, accidents, crises,
   emergencies, or disasters. In distinction to these other terms, catastrophe probably
   captures best the sense of the limit or “tipping point” invoked by an unexpected
   future that introduces a temporal disruption with the present. Its etymology (as
   opposed to those of disaster, crisis, or emergency) hints at this sense of rupture,
   surprise, and novelty.6

    The etymology of catastrophe certainly points in another direction than
the etymology of crisis and disaster. Catastrophe is not about a decision or
about fate, but about a dramatic turn of events, a “reversal of what is
expected” (as in drama) as well as “an overturning; a sudden end.” The root
words in Greek are kata (down) and strephein (turn). Catastrophe is literally
an unexpected “downturn” of events in the face of which, as Aradau and Van
Munster assert, “expert knowledge needs to tackle its very limit: the
unknown.”7 Unlike disaster, which makes one wonder about fate, but like
crisis, which calls for a diagnosis, catastrophe calls for thinking; unlike crisis,
however, catastrophe challenges all existing cognitive frameworks and
“induces new problematizations and modes of questioning,” to use Aradau’s
and Van Munster’s words, that are irreducible to critique.
    Hurricane María’s impact on Puerto Rico is perhaps best understood and
theorized as a catastrophe, or at least there are good indications that
catastrophe is relevant for this task and that it provides indispensable
elements. From the play ¡Ay María! to the multiple accounts and analyses in
this book, one finds the search for voices and frameworks that are not
satisfied with the function of critics or astrologists. Hurricane María calls for
another kind of discursive (and practical) intervention, and this book
contributes much to the search for it. This is evident in the book’s structure: it
combines a play, a dialogue, and reflections from journalists, writers, visual
artists, and curators. Neither simply positive knowledge nor just “criticism”
and much less divination … There is a pause here for sharing accounts,
taking stock, and standing up as witnesses to various dimensions of
catastrophe.
    What I wish to add here is that a particularity of Hurricane María’s
catastrophic character is that it is directly entangled with other scales of
catastrophe. One can refer to Puerto Rico’s economic conditions no longer as
in crisis but as catastrophic, under catastrophe, or as reaching a catastrophic
stage. The debt is unpayable and has been used as a means to strengthen the
colonial condition of Puerto Rico. To be sure, this colonial condition itself
can be understood as a catastrophe: 1898 being a “downturn” that has greatly
framed the history of Puerto Rico and Puerto Ricans for the last one hundred
and twenty years. But the entanglement between Puerto Rico and colonialism
did not start in 1898. It goes back to the period of “discovery” and conquest
of the New World and to the long sixteenth century, which is at the heart of
the formation and constitution of the modern Western world.
    The effects of the catastrophe of “discovery” and conquest since the long
sixteenth century cannot be underestimated. Consider Simon L. Lewis and
Mark A. Maslin’s recent account of the Anthropocene, or the age in which
humans have become the principal contributors to changing the earth. They
argue:

   The 1610 Orbis Spike [the point of reconnection between the Western and Eastern
   hemispheres in the context of European expeditions and colonization, leading to a
   new age for the earth] marks the beginning of today’s globally interconnected
   economy and ecology, which set Earth on a new evolutionary trajectory. It also
   points out to the second transition we identify—from an agricultural to a profit-
   driven mode of living—being the decisive change in Homo sapiens’ relationship
   with the environment. In narrative terms, the Anthropocene began with the
   widespread colonialism and slavery: it is a story of how people treat the
   environment and how people treat each other.8

    For Lewis and Maslin, the start of the Anthropocene, which also marks
the “birth of the modern world,” is deeply connected to the “catastrophic loss
of Native American life.” The Anthropocene is a “new geological epoch
[that] is built from slavery and colonialism, enabled by a long-distance
financial industry.” This results not only in “a new profit-driven mode of
living,” as Lewis and Maslin assert, but also in a normalization of
catastrophe, evident in the form of continued dehumanization, expropriation,
slavery (and its aftermaths), and genocide, otherwise known as coloniality.9
    The story of Puerto Rico cannot be told without reference to Western
modern catastrophe and coloniality. Hurricane María was a catastrophic event
that, among other things, exposed the vulgarity of Puerto Rico’s colonial
relationship with the United States. Listening to Donald Trump’s inaccurate
comparisons between Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane María or his
complaints that Puerto Rico was throwing the US budget “out of whack,” and
watching him throw paper towels to Puerto Ricans in need could not but
recall Cornel West’s warning that a Trump presidency would be a “neofascist
catastrophe.” In the same sentence, West characterized a potential Hillary
Clinton administration as a “neoliberal disaster,”10 which points to the
connections as well as the differences between the concepts of disaster and
catastrophe.
    To be sure, colonialism and slavery continue in multiple other forms:
indigenous reservations and stolen lands, imprisonment and criminalization
of Black men and women, and so on. What appears as catastrophic in modern
colonialism is not only the direct colonial relations that have existed at least
since the early moments of the New World’s “discovery,” but also the
naturalization of the relationship between colonizer and colonized and the
reproduction of this naturalization, not only in the cultures, institutions, and
psyches of normative subjects, but also in colonized peoples themselves. As
the works of Aníbal Quijano and many others indicate, one can also use the
term coloniality to refer to this nexus, this matrix of power, knowledge, and
way of being.11
    As I have argued elsewhere, coloniality can be understood as
metaphysical, demographic, and environmental catastrophe, that is, as a
major “downturn” in the definition of peoples, the environment, and the very
basic coordinates of what constitutes a human world.12 Metaphysical
catastrophe takes place at the foundational level of civilizational systems and
views of the self. In the metaphysical catastrophe of the modern world, ideas
about normative civility and normative subjectivity are built on the
presupposition of unsurpassable lines that separate human beings into more
and less human. This metaphysically catastrophic world sets a divide, not
between the divine and the mundane, but between “civilized” people,
“nature” as a resource to be exploited, and those whom Fanon referred to as
the damnés, or condemned of the earth.13 The modern world is constituted
out of the fabrication of multiple lines of damnation that anchor apartheid and
dehumanization as forms of being-in-the-world.
    In the metaphysical catastrophe of Western modernity, every major area
of conceptualizing existence attains a special meaning or connotation: there is
not only cultural difference but also colonial difference; there is not only
power but also the coloniality of power; not only knowledge but also the
coloniality of knowledge; and so on for being, gender, and other
categories.14 Space, time, and subjectivity are all understood and approached
in ways that sustain the lines between the fully human, nature, and the less
than human (and non-human), the latter being different from and more
terrifying and threatening than nature. This is what explains over five
hundred years of colonialism and the deeper catastrophe that affects not only
Puerto Rico but also the modern/colonial world.15
    In short, metaphysical catastrophe offers grounds for and is itself
strengthened by demographic and environmental catastrophes. Hurricane
María is a catastrophe inseparable from the catastrophe of Puerto Rican
colonialism (a colonialism that continues in liberal, conservative, neoliberal,
and neofascist times) and the catastrophe of modernity/coloniality.
Modernity/coloniality and the Caribbean for that matter are part of a
multilayered and interconnected catastrophic reality. In the face of this,
neither divination nor critique suffices as a response, even as both may have
their place in this context. The “downturn” of modernity/coloniality asks
more directly for countercatastrophic turns, or decolonial turns (symbolic,
material, epistemic, etc.) that explore the limits of dominant cognitive
frameworks and venture to think otherwise. These turns are also strongly
present in the Caribbean.16 I am referring to the creation of activities and
performances that help generate people who identify and question
catastrophe, and about the production of frameworks that can address these
questions in ways that promote decolonization and decoloniality.
    The principal claim here is that, unlike the concepts of crisis and disaster,
catastrophe calls for “new problematizations and modes of questioning.”17
Applying the concept of catastrophe to Hurricane María introduces the need
to account for a “downturn” that is deeper and more profound than any crisis
or disaster. It is not accidental that the conditions of Puerto Ricans on the
island during and after the hurricane, and what many took as a disappointing
response to it by the US government, led to a considerable degree of attention
to the relationship between Puerto Rico and the United States in US national
media. Many came to know for the first time that Puerto Ricans are born US
citizens, which led to the question of how citizens are differentially treated.
This question could not be disentangled from the island’s colonial status,
which became a heated topic of debate (once again) on the island and among
many Puerto Ricans in the mainland United States.
     The catastrophe of Hurricane María cannot be separated from the
catastrophe of US colonialism and of a political debate in Puerto Rico
captured by the question of the status of the island. Likewise, the catastrophe
of colonialism in Puerto Rico cannot be disentangled from the catastrophic
effects of European colonization in the Caribbean and the US presence in the
region—from 1898 to today, when the United States is not only colonizing
Puerto Rico but also keeping an embargo on Cuba and playing a major role in
manufacturing coups in Venezuela. European colonialism in the Caribbean,
in turn, was only the start of a worldwide project of colonization and
peripheralization under the premise of European superiority supposedly
evinced in the act of “discovery” of the New World. To think about
Hurricane María as a catastrophe requires that we carefully consider these
various layers as well as explore “new problematizations and modes of
questioning.” Beyond the misdiagnoses and responses of forms of critical
thinking and human sciences generated out of a sense of either the superiority
or crisis of Western modernity, thinking about catastrophe in the Caribbean
leads to countercatastrophic responses such as decolonial thinking and
decolonial aesthetics and poetics. There are examples of these in this text.
     Countercatastrophic thought and creative work seek to reveal the various
layers of catastrophe and show their entanglement. This requires a “shift in
the geography of reason,” to use the motto of the Caribbean Philosophical
Association, that considers the Caribbean’s prominent role in forming the
modern West and the region’s wealth of responses to coloniality.18
Decolonial thinking requires counter-catastrophic explorations of time and
the formations of space, within, against, and outside the modern/colonial
world. It also entails the investigation of the various forms of subjectivity,
subjection, and liberation that have taken place under the catastrophe of
modernity/coloniality. This leads to an encompassing form of Puerto Rican
and Caribbean thought that defies the strictures of critical theory, traditional
philosophy, the human sciences, and area studies. Facing the catastrophe of
Hurricane María and its aftermath calls for a significant engagement with
Caribbean decolonial thought and decolonial thinking at large.
1. Reinhart Koselleck, “Crisis,” trans. Michaela W. Richter, Journal of the History of
    Ideas 67, no. 2 (2006): 358. For a further development of Koselleck’s thoughts on
    critique and crisis see Reinhart Koselleck, Critique and Crisis: Enlightenment and the
    Pathogenesis of Modern Society (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988).
2. Bo Isenberg, “Critique and Crisis: Reinhart Koselleck’s Thesis of the Genesis of
    Modernity,” trans. Emily Rainsford, Eurozine (2012): 1.
3. See       entry    for    “disaster”   in     the    Online     Etymology     Dictionary
    (https://www.etymonline.com). Also consulted the Oxford Living Dictionary online
    (https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/disaster).
4. Claudia Aradau and Rens Van Munster, Politics of Catastrophe: Genealogies of the
    Unknown (London: Routledge, 2011), 28–29.
5. For example, see Enrico L. Quarantelli, “Catastrophes Are Different from Disasters:
    Some Implications for Crisis Planning and Managing Drawn from Katrina,” Social
    Science Research Council (2006), http://understandingkatrina.ssrc.org/Quarantelli/.
6. Aradau and Van Munster, Politics of Catastrophe, 2.
7. Aradau and Van Munster, Politics of Catastrophe, 6.
8. Simon L. Lewis and Mark A. Maslin, The Human Planet: How We Created the
    Anthropocene (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2018), 13.
9. Lewis and Maslin, The Human Planet, 156, 319–320. On coloniality and catastrophe
    see Nelson Maldonado-Torres, “Outline of Ten Theses on Coloniality and
    Decoloniality,” Frantz Fanon Foundation, October 2016, http://fondation-
    frantzfanon.com/outline-of-ten-theses-on-coloniality-and-decoloniality/.
10. Kurtis Lee, “Cornel West Endorses Jill Stein and Says She—Not Hillary Clinton—Is
    the ‘Only’ Progressive Woman in the Race,’” L.A. Times, July 15, 2016.
    https://www.latimes.com/nation/politics/trailguide/la-na-trailguide-updates-
    1468606689-htmlstory.html. See also, Christina Wilkie, “Trump to Puerto Rico:
    ‘You’ve Thrown Our Budget Out of Whack’,” CNBC, October 3, 2017.
    https://www.cnbc.com/2017/10/03/trump-puerto-rico-budget.html.
11. See Aníbal Quijano, “Coloniality and Modernity/Rationality,” Cultural Studies 21, no.
    2–3 (2007): 168–78. See also two open-access special digital issues on the “decolonial
    turn” in Transmodernity: Journal of Peripheral Cultural Production of the Luso-
    Hispanic World 1, no. 2 (2011); 1, no. 3 (2012). For recent introductions to the topic
    and identification of relevant authors, see Nelson Maldonado-Torres, “The Decolonial
    Turn,” in New Approaches to Latin American Studies: Culture and Power, ed. Juan
    Poblete (New York: Routledge, 2018), 118–27; Walter Mignolo and Catherine Walsh,
    On Decoloniality: Concepts, Analytics, Praxis (Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
    2018).
12. For a more detailed account of coloniality as metaphysical, demographic, and
    environmental catastrophe, see Nelson Maldonado-Torres, “On Metaphysical
    Catastrophe, Post-Continental Thought,” in Relational Undercurrents: Contemporary
    Art of the Caribbean Archipelago, ed. Tatiana Flores and Michelle A. Stephens (Los
    Angeles: Museum of Latin American Art, 2017), 247–59; Maldonado-Torres, “Outline
    of Ten Theses.”
13. Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth, trans. Richard Philcox (New York: Grove,
    2004).
14. See, among others, Walter Mignolo and Arturo Escobar, Globalization and the
    Decolonial Option (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010); Mignolo and Walsh,
    On Decoloniality.
15. For a decolonial approach to Puerto Rico, see Ramón Grosfoguel, Colonial Subjects:
    Puerto Ricans in a Global Perspective (Berkeley: University of California Press,
    2003). For an elaboration of modernity/coloniality as a unit of analysis, see Walter
    Mignolo, Local Histories/Global Designs: Coloniality, Subalternity, and Border
    Thinking (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000).
16. See, for instance, Maldonado-Torres, “The Decolonial Turn.” Starting with the Haitian
    Revolution, the Caribbean is featured in the various major moments of the decolonial
    turn, or decolonial turns, that are described in the text.
17. Aradau and Van Munster, Politics of Catastrophe, 2.
18. See Lewis R. Gordon, “From the President of the Caribbean Philosophical
    Association,” Caribbean Studies 33, no. 2 (2005): xv–xviii; Lewis R. Gordon,
    “Shifting the Geography of Reason in an Age of Disciplinary Decadence,”
    Transmodernity: Journal of Peripheral Cultural Production of the Luso-Hispanic
    World 1, no. 2 (2011): 95–103.
                     ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This project began as a conference by the same name organized by Yarimar
Bonilla at Rutgers, the state university of New Jersey on the one-year
anniversary of hurricane María. That conference was made possible by the
sponsorship of the Office of the Senior Vice President of Academic Affairs,
the Department of Latino and Caribbean Studies, the Global Institute for
Research on Women, the Center for Women in the Arts and Humanities, the
Committee to Advance Our Common Purposes, and the Rutgers Advanced
Institute for Critical Caribbean Studies.1 We would like to particularly extend
our gratitude to Isabel Nazario, associate vice president for strategic
initiatives at Rutgers, for having the vision and the commitment necessary to
make that event possible and to her entire staff for their hard work and
dedication. Without Isabel’s commitment to bringing attention to the
historical importance of Hurricane María, this volume would not have been
conceived.
     We would also like to thank both the original participants of the
conference and the contributors who joined afterward for taking on the
challenge that was posed to them. Writing about the consequences and
legacies of Hurricane María a mere year after its devastating impact would be
difficult for anyone. The contributors of this book carry the added weight of
managing their own personal crucibles and experiences of the storm. At the
conference where many of these papers were first presented, participants
often had to hold back their tears, carefully manage their shaky voices, and
push through waves of emotion in order to attempt to offer insight while still
in the midst of their own individual and collective trauma. All of this while
offering presentations, and later drafting polished essays, in a language that
for many is both foreign and imposed.
     For those who presented on that first-year anniversary, as well as those
who traveled from around New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, and beyond
in order to attend, the event was an occasion for collective mourning and
solidarity. Even as we complete this volume nearly two years after María,
Puerto Rico remains embroiled in crisis, confusion, and turmoil. Most of the
traumatic processes experienced since the storm remain unprocessed and
unaccounted for. We still do not know the names of those that were lost, the
full extent of the damage, the scope of government mismanagement, much
less if and when there might be some form of repair and redress. We thank
our contributors for completing these essays in the midst of their numerous
and multisided efforts to push toward a just recovery and hope that this text
can, in some small way, contribute to the larger reckoning that is yet to come.
    In addition, we would like to thank the team at Haymarket Books, and in
particular Anthony Arnove, for recognizing the importance of this
conversation and working with us to speedily bring this volume to print.
Lastly, we are grateful to Pablo Morales, Dawn Welles, and Kimberly Roa
for their deft assistance in editing, revising, and nurturing these pages.




1. Full details of the conference are available at https://academicaffairs.rutgers.edu/pr and
   videos       of     the    performances       and       panels    are      available     at
   https://livestream.com/rutgersitv/aftershocks.
                      CONTRIBUTOR BIOS

Yarimar Bonilla is a professor in the Department of Latino, Africana, and
Puerto Rican Studies at Hunter College and the PhD program in
Anthropology at the Center of the City University of New York (CUNY).
Bonilla is the author of Non-sovereign Futures: French Caribbean Politics in
the Wake of Disaster (2015) and a frequent columnist in venues such as the
Washington Post, the Nation, and El Nuevo Día. Bonilla writes broadly about
questions of sovereignty, citizenship, and race in the Americas. In 2018,
Bonilla was named a Carnegie Fellow in support of her current book project
which examines the political, economic, and social aftermath of Hurricane
María in Puerto Rico.

Rima Brusi is an advocate, educator, researcher, and essayist. Formerly a
faculty member at the University of Puerto Rico, Brusi is the founder,
director, and principal investigator of UPR’s Center for University Access, an
outreach, research, and advocacy initiative. She is an applied anthropologist
at the Education Trust, and she is currently writer-in-residence at the Center
for Human Rights and Peace Studies at CUNY–Lehman College.

Mariana Carbonell is a freelance theater director, producer, translator,
dramaturg, and choreographer based in San Juan, Puerto Rico. She has
worked with numerous stage productions and served as production
coordinator and stage manager for Tablado Puertorriqueño and Teatro Breve,
among others.

Arcadio Díaz-Quiñones is professor emeritus of Spanish at Princeton
University, where he also served as director of the program in Latin
American studies. He had previously taught at the Universidad de Puerto
Rico, Río Piedras. His publications include an edition of El prejuicio racial
en Puerto Rico, by Tomás Blanco (1985), and two books of essays: La
memoria rota (1993) and El arte de bregar (2000). He also edited the volume
El Caribe entre imperios (1997). His book Sobre los principios: los
intelectuales caribeños y la tradición, was published in Argentina in 2006. A
memória rota, an anthology of his essays translated into Portuguese,
appeared in Brazil in 2016.

Tatiana Flores is an associate professor of Latino and Caribbean studies at
Rutgers University–New Brunswick. A specialist in modern and
contemporary Latin American art, Flores is the author of Mexico’s
Revolutionary Avant-Gardes: From Estridentismo to ¡30-30! (Yale
University Press, 2013), winner of the 2014 Mexico Section of the Latin
American Studies Association Humanities Book Prize. Her recently curated
exhibitions include Wrestling with the Image: Caribbean Interventions
(Washington, D.C., 2011), Disillusions: Gendered Visions of the Caribbean
and Its Diasporas (New York, 2011), and Medios y ambientes (Mexico City,
2012). Flores is a member of the editorial board of ASAP/Journal and The
Association for the Study of the Arts of the Present and a regular contributor
and adviser to Art Nexus. Her second book project in progress focuses on the
art and visual culture of Venezuela during the presidency of Hugo Chávez.

Sofía Gallisá Muriente is a visual artist working mainly with video, film,
photography, and text. In 2011, she co-founded IndigNación, a Spanish-
language multimedia collective born out of the Occupy Wall Street
movement, and in 2012 she co-founded Restore the Rock, a non-profit
hurricane relief organization dedicated to people-powered recovery after
Superstorm Sandy. In 2015, Sofia was awarded an emerging artist grant from
TEOR/éTica, Costa Rica, where her work was exhibited in a solo show titled
Buscando La Sombra. She has exhibited internationally, most recently at ifa-
Galerie, Berlin; the Getty PST: LA/LA, California; and Espacio El Dorado,
Colombia. Since 2014 Sofia has been co-director of Beta-Local, dedicated to
fostering knowledge exchange and transdisciplinary practices in Puerto Rico.

Isar Godreau is a cultural anthropologist and researcher at the Institute for
Interdisciplinary Research at the University of Puerto Rico at Cayey, where
she directs various institutional initiatives and research projects. She is the
author of Arrancando mitos de raíz, a guide for anti-racist teaching (2013),
and Scripts of Blackness: Race, Cultural Nationalism and US Colonialism in
Puerto Rico (2016).
Christopher Gregory is a Puerto Rican photographer based in New York
City who works extensively on various photographic projects in Puerto Rico
and Latin America. His work is particularly interested in examining the
residue of political and colonial power. He is a founding member of
Blackbox, a visual cooperative that merges the creative processes of
photography and design to build immersive stories, and he lectures in the
New Media Narratives Program at the International Center of Photography.

Mónica A. Jiménez is a historian and a poet whose research and writing
explore the intersections of law, race, and empire in Latin America and the
Caribbean with a focus on Puerto Rico. She has received fellowships in
support of her work from the Ford Foundation, the Puerto Rican Studies
Association, the Institute for Global Law and Policy at Harvard Law School,
and the University of Texas at Austin. She is a Canto Mundo Fellow and an
assistant professor of African and African diaspora studies at the University
of Texas at Austin.

Naomi Klein is a bestselling author and award-winning journalist, is the
inaugural Gloria Steinem endowed chair in media, culture, and feminist
studies at Rutgers University-New Brunswick. She is senior correspondent
for the Intercept and contributor at the Nation magazine. She is also a Puffin
Fellow at the Nation Institute. Her most recent book, The Battle for Paradise:
Puerto Rico Takes on the Disaster Capitalists, was published in June 2018.

Eduardo Lalo is a novelist, essayist, film director, and photographer.
Eduardo’s novel Simone (2012) won the Rómulo Gallegos Prize in 2013. He
publishes columns of literary criticism in publications such as 80 Grados. He
has directed two medium-length films: donde (2003) and La ciudad perdida
(2005). In addition, he has shown his work as a photographer in more than a
dozen exhibits.

Marisol LeBrón is an assistant professor in the Department of Mexican
American and Latina/o Studies at the University of Texas at Austin. An
interdisciplinary scholar working across American studies, Latina/o/x studies,
and feminist studies her work focuses on social inequality, policing, violence,
and protest movements in Puerto Rico and US communities of color. She is
the author of Policing Life and Death: Race, Violence, and Resistance in
Puerto Rico (University of California Press, 2019) and one of the co-creators
of the Puerto Rico Syllabus, a digital resource for understanding the Puerto
Rican debt crisis.

Beatriz Llenín Figueroa’s research and creative work revolve around
Caribbean literature and philosophy, island and archipelagic studies, gender
and queer theory, decoloniality, and street theater and performance. She
teaches at the UPR-Mayagüez campus as an adjunct faculty member in an
adjunct country, where she also works as editor for Editora Educación
Emergente and as freelance editor and translator. Through her work with the
collectives PROTESTAmos and Taller Libertá, she fights for a decolonial
future for the archipelago, debt relief and reparations, public education, and
independent art in Puerto Rico. Some of her creative work on Puerto Rico’s
current crisis has been recently published in Puerto Islas: crónicas, crisis,
amor (2018).

Hilda Lloréns is a cultural anthropologist and a decolonial scholar. She is the
author of Imaging the Great Puerto Rican Family: Framing Nation, Race,
and Gender during the American Century (2014). The thread that binds
Lloréns’s scholarship is understanding how racial and gender inequality
manifest in cultural production, nation building, access to environmental
resources, and exposure to environmental degradation. Lloréns’s research has
been centrally concerned with critiquing structural inequalities and
dismantling taken-for-granted notions of power.

Natasha Lycia Ora Bannan is a human rights lawyer. Her work focuses on
the economic exploitation and discrimination against low-wage Latinx
immigrant workers, as well as legal support in the face of the economic and
humanitarian crisis in Puerto Rico. She works on both domestic litigation and
international advocacy before human rights mechanisms concerning issues
including: state-sanctioned violence and failure to protect; self-determination
and decolonization processes; gender justice; and immigrants’ rights. Natasha
is associate counsel at LatinoJustice PRLDEF and president of the National
Lawyers Guild, the nation’s oldest progressive bar association. She is the
second-youngest president in the guild’s history and its first Latina.
Nelson Maldonado-Torres is a professor of Latino and Caribbean studies,
and comparative literature at Rutgers University–New Brunswick.
Maldonado-Torres is director of the Rutgers Advanced Institute in Critical
Caribbean Studies and the former President of the Caribbean Philosophical
Association (2008-2013). He has been selected in 2018-2019 as distinguished
visiting scholar by the Academy of Sciences of South Africa. Professor
Maldonado-Torres is currently working on two book-length projects:
“Fanonian Meditations,” exploring the epistemological basis of “ethnic
studies,” and “Theorizing the Decolonial Turn,” which provides a historical
and theoretical overview of the “decolonial turn.”

Arturo Massol-Deyá is the executive director of Casa Pueblo. He is from the
mountainous area of Puerto Rico in the municipality of Adjuntas, where his
parents founded the community-based organization Casa Pueblo. Massol-
Deyá grew up in this project and has chaired its board of directors since 2007.
A graduate of the public school system (1986) and the University of Puerto
Rico (1990), he obtained his doctoral degree from the Center for Microbial
Ecology at Michigan State University in 1994. Since then he has been a
faculty member at the Department of Biology of the UPR Mayagüez campus.

Carla Minet is a journalist and executive director of the Center for
Investigative Journalism in Puerto Rico, and for six years she was executive
director of the grassroots organization called Prensa Comunitaria
(Community Press). Her investigative work ranges from political campaign
donations to environmental issues and government affairs. For the past fifteen
years she worked as a reporter, researcher, editor, and producer for radio,
television, and online, in traditional and independent media outlets such as
Channel 6 Public Television, Radio Universidad, El Nuevo Día, Univision,
NotiCel, 80grados, and Diálogo. She has been a speaker at different
conferences and forums, a media trainer, and a professor at the University of
Puerto Rico.

Sarah Molinari is a PhD candidate in anthropology at the CUNY Graduate
Center and a visiting researcher at the Institute of Caribbean Studies at the
University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras. She is also a collaborator on the
Puerto Rico Syllabus project and a member of the Puerto Rican Studies
Association executive board. Prior to graduate school, Sarah co-directed an
oral history project at the Center for Puerto Rican Studies at Hunter College.
She is currently conducting ethnographic fieldwork in Puerto Rico on the
politics of debt resistance and hurricane recovery with a National Science
Foundation grant.

Ed Morales has written for the Nation, the New York Times, the Washington
Post, Rolling Stone, and the Guardian, and was a staff writer at the Village
Voice and columnist at Newsday. He is the author of Latinx: The New Force
in Politics and Culture (2018), The Latin Beat (2003), and Living in
Spanglish (2002). While a Columbia University Revson Fellow, he produced
and co-directed Whose Barrio? (2009), an award-winning documentary about
the gentrification of East Harlem, inspired by his New York Times essay
“Spanish Harlem on His Mind.” His forthcoming book Fantasy Island:
Colonialism, Exploitation, and the Betrayal of Puerto Rico will be published
in the fall of 2019. Morales is currently a lecturer at Columbia University’s
Center for the Study of Ethnicity and Race and the CUNY Graduate School
of Journalism.

Frances Negrón-Muntaner is a filmmaker, writer, curator, and professor of
English and comparative literature at Columbia University. Negrón-Muntaner
is the founding curator of the Latino Arts and Activism Archive at Columbia
University. Among her books and publications are: Boricua Pop: Puerto
Ricans and the Latinization of American Culture (CHOICE Award, 2004),
The Latino Media Gap (2014), and Sovereign Acts: Contesting Colonialism
in Native Nations and Latinx America (2017). She is currently the director of
Unpayable Debt, a working group at Columbia University that studies debt
regimes in the world. She is a curator of and contributor to NoMore-Debt:
Caribbean Syllabus (first and second edition) and director of Valor y Cambio
(Value and Change), an ongoing art, storytelling, and community currency
project in Puerto Rico.

Patricia Noboa Ortega is an assistant professor of social sciences at the
University of Puerto Rico–Cayey. Noboa Ortega is the President of the board
of directors of Psychoanalytic Society of Puerto Rico. Her research work
focuses on examining factors that mediate Latina women’s decisions about
their sexuality and sexual health, specifically in Puerto Rico. She collaborated
on a project that developed an HIV/STI intervention for Latina women,
which was recognized by United Nations AIDS. She has studied
psychoanalysis in Quebec, Canada, and has disseminated her research papers
in peer-reviewed journals.

Ana Portnoy Brimmer holds a BA and MA in English from the University
of Puerto Rico, and is an MFA candidate in creative writing at Rutgers
University–Newark. Ana is the inaugural recipient of the Sandra Cisneros
Fellowship, a Pushcart Prize nominee, and a co-organizer of the
#PoetsForPuertoRico movement.

Erika P. Rodríguez is freelance photographer, and her work has appeared in
the New York Times, the Washington Post, and CNN, among other venues.
Being from a place that is culturally Latin American but politically a territory
of the United States has shaped Rodriguez’s interest as a documentary
photographer, to explore the topics of community and identity. After
Hurricane María ravaged the Caribbean, she was one of the lead
photographers covering the aftermath for the international media. Currently
based in San Juan, Puerto Rico, Rodriguez covers Puerto Rico’s economic
crisis, its slow recovery from disaster, and its colonial condition.

Eva Prados Rodríguez is a lawyer and human rights defender. She is a
spokesperson for the Broad Movement of Women of Puerto Rico and the
Citizen Front for Debt Audit, a collective of organizations and individuals
that are demanding a comprehensive and citizen audit of the public debt of
Puerto Rico.

Marianne Ramírez-Aponte is executive director and chief curator of the
Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Puerto Rico. Under her tenure the MAC
has been awarded the Solidarity in Education Award 2017 granted by the
Miranda Foundation. She is cofounder and member of the board of directors
of important advocacy and public service organizations such as Puerto Rico
Museum Association, Arte Santurce Cultural Alliance, and Movimiento Una
Sola Voz.
Carlos Rivera Santana is a decolonial and visual cultural studies scholar.
Rivera Santana is currently a research associate at the Center for Puerto Rican
Studies at Hunter College–City University of New York (CUNY). For over
seven years Rivera Santana was based in Australia, where he completed his
PhD in cultural studies and philosophy at the University of Queensland, the
university where he became an assistant professor specializing in cultural and
postcolonial studies. His forthcoming book entitled Archaeology of
Colonization: From Aesthetics to Biopolitics will be released in fall 2019 as
part of the book series Critical Perspectives in Theory, Culture and Politics.

Giovanni Roberto is a social justice organizer and the director of the Center
for Political Development in Puerto Rico, an umbrella organization that set
up community kitchens after Hurricane María and now has a number of
mutual aid centers around the island. He was a student leader during the
2010–2011 strikes at the University of Puerto Rico.

Sandra Rodríguez Cotto is a seasoned investigative journalist and a public
relations consultant, political and media analyst, blogger, and award-winning
author. Rodríguez Cotto writes a weekly op-ed column for NotiCel,
contributes to several media in Latin America and the United States, and
writes a blog, En Blanco y Negro con Sandra. She hosts a daily radio show
on Red Informativa and covered Hurricane María on WAPA Radio 680, the
only radio network that remained on the air.
    Her books include Frente a los medios (2014), En Blanco y Negro con
Sandra (2016); Bitácora de una transmisión radial (2018) which received the
prestigious Puerto Rican Literature Institute award, and Mass Media in
Puerto Rico (2019).

Adrian Román is a mixed-media artist focusing primarily on sculpture and
drawing. Román’s work is informed by issues of race, migration, and identity
while exploring both the personal and historical memory of the two disparate
worlds that he inhabits: the tropical landscape of Puerto Rico and the
overpopulated cityscape of New York. His practice combines drawing,
painting, and sculpture within immersive installation environments composed
of objects collected from different communities, from salvaged wood and
window frames to historic artifacts and vintage photographs. The results draw
upon the history and memory embedded in the objects. Román is a member
of the NARS foundation and has worked closely with organizations such as
Semilla Arts Initiative in Philadelphia and Caribbean Cultural Center African
Diaspora in New York. Adrian’s work has been exhibited in several solo and
group shows in Puerto Rico and the United States.

Raquel Salas Rivera is the 2018–19 poet laureate of Philadelphia and the
inaugural recipient of the Ambroggio Prize from the Academy of American
Poets. Their fourth book, lo terciario/the tertiary, was on the 2018 National
Book Award Longlist, and was selected by Remezcla, Entropy, Literary Hub,
mitú, Book Riot, and Publishers Weekly as one of the best poetry books of
2018. They have received fellowships and residencies from the Sundance
Institute, the Kimmel Center for Performing Arts, the Arizona Poetry Center,
and CantoMundo.

Richard Santiago (Tiago) earned a BFA from Marist College in New York
and a master of fine arts from the Hoffberger School of Painting at the
Maryland Institute of Art in Baltimore under the tutelage of Grace Hartigan.
He was a university professor at the Escuela de Artes Plásticas y Diseño de
Puerto Rico (School of Visual Arts and Design of Puerto Rico). He has
worked in many genres, including film, music, sculpture, graphic arts, and
street art. Recently, he has focused on creating collective art projects that
center on social issues and pivot around the concepts of empathy and
solidarity.

Benjamín Torres Gotay studied journalism at Universidad del Sagrado
Corazón in San Juan, Puerto Rico. Has worked for various media outlets and
for El Nuevo Día since 1997, where he is now a special topics writer and
columnist. He is the author of the novel Tatuajes en cuerpo de niña.
                                 INDEX

3Rs for Puerto Rico, 193
80 Grados, 319
1951 Refugee Convention, 130

Acevedo, Rafael, 169
Acosta, Melba, 217–18
Act 20/22, 8, 9
Action Center on Race and the Economy, 218
Ad Hoc Group. See Government Development Bank Ad Hoc Group
Adjuntas, 107, 298, 304, 328
Agitarte, 168
Aguadilla, 67
Aibonito, 154–55
AIG, 219
Alberto, Luis, 82–84
Albizu Campos, Pedro, 15, 263–64, 266–69
Albuquerque, 181
Alcalá del Olmo, Luis, 83
American Enterprise Institute, 23
Anthropocene, 336–37
Antigua, 35
Antilles, 100
Antongiorgi, Sandra, 167
Apollo Education Group, 242
Apollon, Willy, 273
Aradau, Claudia, 335–36
Arasibo Steakhouse, 68–69
Arctic Wildlife Refuge, 23
Arecibo, 67, 68, 313
Argentina, 212, 215, 220
Arizona, 1
ArtForum, 162
Art in America, 162
Artistas Solidarixs y en Resistencia, 168
Arts and Culture Committee of the Puerto Rican Agenda of Chicago, 192
Associated Press, 77
Atlantic City, 220
Atlantic Ocean, 128
Aurelius Capital, 215
Avenue Capital, 218–20
¡Ay María!, xii, 38–41, 336
¡Ay, Carmela tu amor me estriñe!, 163
Ayuda Legal Huracán María, 288

Bacó Bagué, Alberto, 214
Banco Popular, 294
Banco Santander, 279
Barbuda, 35, 36
Barcelona, 30
Barceloneta, 68
Barclays, 214
Barrio Bubao, 143
Barrio Mameyes, 84
Barrio Marín, 84
The Battle for Paradise, 22, 29–30
Bayamón, 142, 145, 166
Beck, Ulrich, 335
Begnaud, David, 114, 195
Bishop, Rob, 303–4
Bitcoin, 27, 28, 29
Black Panthers, 316
Blanco, Carmen, 67
Blanco, Jorge and Wilfredo, 67
BlueMountain Capital, 214
Bohoslavsky, Juan Pablo, 230
Bonilla, Yarimar, xii–xiii, 11, 24, 241
Borinken Me Llama Public Art Series Festival, 167
Boston, 195
BP, 32
Brannana, Natasha, 15
Brigada de Todxs, 279
Brigada Solidaria del Oeste, 98
Brimmer, Ana Portnoy, 9
Britain, 90
Brook, Peter, 39
Brown, Gaston, 35
Brusi, Rima, 7, 234
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 216
de Burgos, Julia, x, 236

Cabo Rojo, 107
Caez, Guillermina, 310
Caguas, 286–87, 292, 315
Caguas Disaster Recuperation Center, 292
Camp Tabonuco, 166
Camuy, 68, 315
Candlewood Investment Group, 218
Canóvanas, 150, 271, 275
Canyon Capital, 215, 243
Caonillas River, 82
Cardona, Sofía Irene, 319
Caribbean, 124, 214
   catastrophe and, 333, 339–40
   climate of, 125, 128–29
   colonialism in, x, 92, 99, 340
   debt and, 213
   decolonization and, 16, 332
   disaster capitalism in, 35
   disaster in, 334–35
   economic competition in, 216
   economies in, 11
   fossil fuels and, 304, 307
   history of, 92
   identity and, 100
   media and, 140
   Puerto Rico the “poor house” of, 6
Caribbean Cultural Center and African Diaspora Institute, 180, 186
Caribbean Philosophical Association, 340
Carolina, 145
Carretero, Christian, 21
Carrión, José B., III, 7
Cartagena, Dalma, 34
Casa Pueblo, 22, 305–7, 328
Catalonia, 30
Cataño, 174–75
Catarsis: Re/contruyendo después de María, 178
Cayey, 156, 311, 312
CBS, 114, 195
Celso Barbosa, José, 142
Center for Economic and Policy Research, 253
Center for Emergency Operations, 73
Center for Investigative Journalism, 73–78, 194, 214–15, 217–18
Center for Puerto Rican Studies, 281
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 74, 77
Centro de Apoyo de Las Carolinas, 315
Centro de Apoyo Mutuo, 286, 294–95, 313–14
Centro de Desarrollo Político, Educativo y Cultural, 315
Centro de Estudio Transdisciplinario para la Agroecología, 315
Centro de Periodismo Investigativo. See Center for Investigative Journalism
Centro para el Desarrollo Politico, Educativo y Cultural, 312
Chicago, 167–68, 192–94, 196
Cintron, Joel, 73
Citigroup, 216
Citizens’ Commission for the Comprehensive Audit of the Public Debt, 251, 253–54
Citizens’ Front to Audit the Debt, 231, 250
citizenship, ix, 7, 35, 99, 113–21, 128, 130, 164, 167–69, 183–84, 212, 216, 221–22,
     229–31, 251, 268, 339
Claridad, 319–20
climate change, ix, 16, 22–23, 29, 33, 36, 74, 78, 120–21, 128–32, 163, 175, 181, 292,
     299–300
Clinton, Bill, 213, 219
Clinton, Chelsea, 219
Clinton, Hillary, 219, 337
CNN, 77
Coco de Oro, 187
COFINA, 221, 253
Colau, Ada, 30
Colectivo Columpio, 315
Collective Ingenuity, or the Curse of the Parrot, 171–72
colonialism, ix, 3, 21, 128, 188, 194, 266
    art about, 138, 168–69, 172–73, 176, 179, 184
    bankruptcy and, 219
    Caribbean, 92, 99, 340
    catastrophe and, 339–40
    climate change and, 12
    debt and, 243, 336
    disaster capitalism and, 11
    economic exploitation and, 212
    education and, 243
    fossil fuels and, 304
    genocide and, 337
    Hurricane María and, 10–12, 16, 87–88, 92, 225
    identity and, 138–39
    media and, 120
    Narváez and, 321
    in Puerto Rico, 138–39, 168, 172–73, 194, 321, 336–39
    as business opportunity, 28
    citizenship and, 116, 184
    complexity of, 188
    crisis of, 176
    debt and, 243
    global capitalism and, 310
    privatization and, 304
    racism surrounding, 92
    Supreme Court on, 25, 232
    Trump and, 120
    Puerto Rican Nationalist Party and, 15, 263–67
    racism and, 118, 120, 212
    resistance to, 320, 322
    slavery and, 338
   Spanish, x, 92, 182
   Spanish-American War and, 227, 231
   United States, 168–69, 172–73, 179, 182, 194, 264, 268, 304, 310, 337–40
Colón-Rodríguez, Teodoro, 75–76
Colón, Willie, 75
Comerío, 187
Comité de Cariño Criollo, 101
commonwealth status, 6, 8, 25, 98, 140, 184, 213, 215, 217, 219
Congressional Record, 116
Connecticut, ix, 132
Connecticut College, 195
Consejo Integral Comunitario de la Barriada Morales, 315
Contra Viento y María, 101
COR3, 291
Cordillera Central, 153, 302
Las cosas de María, 163–64
Cruet, Lionel, 181
Cruz, Eugenia, 84
Cuba, 213, 227, 340
Cuchí, Felipe, 163
Cuomo, Andrew, 214

Damián Abajo, 75
Dávila Rinaldi, Carlos, 164–65
Davis, Polk & Wardwell, 219
debt, xi, 3, 5, 25, 325
   amount of, 5, 117, 211, 213, 224–25, 251
   bonds and, 6
   causes of, 212–15
   citizens’ audit of, 218, 231, 250–54
   creditors of, 169, 214–15, 235, 252
   education and, 242–43
   global perspective on, 21
   Great Recession and, 219
   illegitimate, 226, 358
   interest, 252
   investigative journalism on, 73
   local government and, 161
   media on, 120
   protests against, 8, 22, 26, 323
   restructuring of, 221, 229, 232
   trading on, 220
   unpayable, ix, 7, 99, 211, 234, 241, 336
decolonization, xi, 8, 16, 307, 332, 339
“Defend Puerto Rico,” 180–81, 186
Defensa Civil, 302
Delano, Pablo, 172–73
Del desorden habitual de las cosas, 319
Delgado Esquilín, Gloribel, 169
democracy, ix, xiii, 6, 173, 264, 266–68, 323
Democratic Party, 211, 217, 219, 221, 328
Demographic Registry, 74, 76–78
De Niro, Robert, 36
Departamento de Vivienda. See Puerto Rico Department of Housing
Detroit, 30, 215, 217
DeVos, Betsy, 236
Diasporamus, 180–82
Disaster Recovery Plan, 291
Dominican Republic, 213, 281
Double Line Capital, 215
Downes v. Bidwell, 265
Dresden, 90
Dropp, Kyle, 114
Droz, Nina, 324

Eastern Europe, 23
Ecoeléctrica, 303
education, ix, 34, 139, 163, 170–71, 227–29, 234–44, 286, 305–6, 330
    charter schools and, 23, 214, 243
    funding for, x, 7
    Head Start, 275
    school closures, 27, 145, 235–36, 238, 286, 325
El-Hinnawi, Essam, 129
El Hoyo, 306
El Yunque National Forest, 107
Emanuel, Rahm, 219
Emergency Banking Act of 1933, 267
Emergency Management Office, 65
End the Debt! Decolonize! Liberate! Scroll Project, 168
Entredichos, 170–171
Environmental Protection Agency, 276
Espacios Abiertos, 319, 322
Estado Libre Asociado, xi, 6, 25, 264–66, 269
Europe, 99, 129, 333, 337, 340
Exit, Voice, and Loyalty, xi
Export Services Act, 215

Fajardo, 39
Family Affairs, 68
Fanon, Frantz, 338
Fátima Sisters Order, 64
Fazaa Food Service, 311
FBI, 321
FEMA, 40, 84–87, 92, 120–21, 139, 212, 238, 278, 282, 285–86, 288–95, 305
    blue tarps of, 166, 188, 288–89
    denials, 10, 13, 78, 277
    Individual and Household Assistance Program, 285, 288
    Media Relations, 292
    National Guard and, 156
    Puerto Rican government and, 68
    Puerto Rico News Desk, 288, 292
    Transitional Sheltering Assistance program of, 132
Fernández, Ana María, 281
Fifth Amendment, 265
Financial Oversight and Management Board, 161, 168–69, 171, 211, 216–18, 222, 235
Fir Tree Partners, 215, 219
Fiscal Control Board, 7, 11, 22–23, 43, 77, 143, 169, 227, 230, 232, 250–54, 265, 287, 301,
    320, 323–24, 329
Flint, Michigan, 30
Florida, 1, 42, 85, 86, 115, 119–20, 129, 132, 184, 222, 242
Florida State University, 299
“Focus on Puerto Rico”, 180–81, 184
Forbes, 220
Ford, Gerald R., 217
Forensic Sciences Institute, 69
For Puerto Rico, There Is a Better Way, 235
La Fortaleza, 269
Fortuño, Luis, 214, 228, 302, 304
Fountain Christian Bilingual School, 237
Fox News, 22
France, 219
Franck, Harry A., 257
Franklin Templeton, 213
Frente Ciudadano por la Auditoria de la Deuda, 231, 250
Friedman, Milton, 22, 28
Fuera del quicio, 319

Gallardo, Frances, 181
Gallisá, Sofia, 13
García Padilla, Alejandro, 211, 213–15, 217–18, 229, 234–35
gender, ix, 173, 174, 222, 338
George Washington University, 69, 139
Géricault, Théodore, 196
Germany, 90
Ginsburg, Allen, 8
Godreau Aubert, Ariadna, 99
Godreau, Isar, 7, 234
Golden Tree, 252
Goldman Sachs, 218
González, Jennifer, 88, 242
González-Ramírez, Andrea, 1
Goodloe, Paul, 114
Government Development Bank, 214, 218
Government Development Bank Ad Hoc Group, 217, 219, 234
Grand Canyon University, 239
Great Depression, 175, 264, 267
Great Recession, 215–16
Greece, 30, 212, 215, 219, 220
Gregory, Chris, 12
Groundscapes Displaced, 166
Guam, 227
Guánica, 64
Guayama, 67
Guaynabo, 148, 150, 174, 285
Gulf Coast, 3, 121
Gundlach, Jeffrey, 215

Haiti, 88, 213, 326
Harvard University, 69, 151
health care, ix, 211, 224, 237, 276, 280
Hedge Clippers, 214, 217
Heritage Foundation, 23
Hernández-Santiago, Ricardo, 169
Hirschman, Albert O., xi
House of Representatives, 116, 119, 230, 242
Houston, 86, 115
Huelga del Pueblo, 309
Humacao, 147, 154–55, 271, 273, 313–14
human rights, ix, 221, 225, 227, 229–30, 251, 320–28, 330
Hurricane Alex, 86
Hurricane Georges, 65
Hurricane Harvey, 53, 86, 115, 119–20
Hurricane Hugo, 65
Hurricane Ike, 86
Hurricane Irene, 86
Hurricane Irma, 26–27, 191, 199
    damages of, 65–66, 139, 241, 250, 269
    death toll of, 276, 314
    electricity and, 24, 106
    recovery funding for, 86, 120
Hurricane Katrina, x, 3, 22–24, 30, 32, 239, 337
    disaster capitalism and, 121
    racism and, 119
    recovery funding for, 86
    revocery funding for, 121
Hurricane María, xi, 128, 320, 332–340. See also FEMA
   in Adjuntas, 298, 304
   artistic responses to, 163–75, 178–89
   bitcoiners on, 31
   in Caguas, 286–287, 292, 294
   in Canévanas, 276–282
   climate refugees and, 129
   colloquia on, ix–xiii
   colonialism and, 10–12, 16, 87–88, 92, 225
   comedores sociales and, 313–15
   damages of, 82–84, 101–3, 106, 113, 132, 138–39, 147–48, 154–60, 178, 186,
        198–201, 211, 229, 234, 242, 276, 298–99
   death toll of, 3–4, 69–70, 73–78, 105, 151, 193–94, 276, 280, 314
   debt and, 252, 325
   devastation of, 1, 4–5
   education and, 234–43
   electricity and, 24, 113, 149, 154, 182, 301–3, 328
   firsthand accounts of, 25
   “Focus on Puerto Rico” and, 184
   grassroots organizing and, 10, 34
   hate violence and, 327
   job losses of, 83
   La Escuela de Artes Plásticas y Diseño de Puerto Rico, 192
   media and, 120, 124–25, 128, 140, 224
   migration and, 36, 161
   military and, 326
   police and, 329
   recovery funding for, 86, 120–22, 230, 285, 328
   revelations of, x, 2–3, 5, 9, 26, 152, 188, 195, 263, 320, 325
   size of, 299
   structural inequality and, 5
   as “teacher,” 21
   telecommunications and, 66–67, 301, 305
   theater and, 39
   trauma and, 13, 27, 274
   in Utuado, 299
Hurricane Matthew, 86
Hurricane Rita, 86, 121
Hurricane San Ciprian, 175, 267
Hurricane Sandy, 86, 121
Hurricanes Harvey, 120
Hurricane Wilma, 86, 121
Hyperallergic, 162

Illinois, ix
Individual Investors Act, 215
Interamerican Commission of Human Rights, 326
Inter American University Law School, 77
The Intercept, 36
Intermezzo: Ship Adrift, 173
International Monetary Fund, 7, 212, 215, 221, 235, 243
International Socialist Organization, 311–12
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 78

Jaresko, Natalie, 22–23, 169
Jayuya, 84, 166
Jiménez, Monica, 15
Johnson, Lyndon B., 116
Jones Act, 5, 118, 212
Jones, Paul Tudor, 214
Juana(s) Matos, 174
la Junta, xi, 7, 23–26, 215, 235–36, 239, 240, 287. See also Fiscal Control Board
Junte Gente, 24

Keleher and Associates, 236
Keleher, Julia, 236–37
Kilómetro 0, 319, 322, 326, 329
Klein, Naomi, xii–xiii, 11
Ko, Allan, 120
Korean War, x
Koselleck, Reinhart, 333
Krueger, Barbara, 215–16

La Escuela de Artes Plásticas y Diseño de Puerto Rico, 192
Lalo, Eduardo, 12–13, 118
La Piscina Editorial, 101
Lares, 144, 146, 314–15
Larkin, Richard, 220
Las Marias, 314
Las propias, 99
Lasry, Marc, 218–21
Latin America, 66, 100, 216, 310
Latino USA, 77
LeBrón, Marisol, 4
Legal and Psychological Clinic, 281–82
Lehman Brothers, 6
Lesser Antilles, 65
Lewis, Simon L., 336–37
Llenin Figueroa, Beatriz, 13
Lloréns, Hilda, 12
Llovet-Díaz, Wanda, 76
Lo onírico del Caño, 174–75
Louisiana, 3, 85, 239
Lozada, Jannette, 276
Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport, 124–25, 145

MACPR. See Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Puerto Rico
Maddow, Rachel, 114
Maldonado Torres, Nelson, 11, 118–19
Manatí, 38, 63
La Maraña, 187
Marathon Asset Management, 215
María Montañez Gómez elementary school, 286, 294
Mariana, 24, 26
Mari Brás, Juan, 321
Mari Narváez, Mari, 4, 10, 15, 319–20
Mari Pesquera, Santiago, 321
Marrero, Glorimar, 174–75
Martínez Centeno, Aníbal, 327
Martínez Nadal, Rafael, 267, 269
Martín Peña Channel, 175
Martorell, Antonio, 181
Maryland, 86
Maslin, Mark A., 336–37
Massachusetts, ix, 119
Massol, Arturo, Deyá 10, 15, 22, 32, 328
Matos, Juana, 175
Mayagüez, 39, 67, 98, 313
MAY DAY 2018, Puerto Rico, 167–68
McClintock, Kenneth, 217
McGrath Muñíz, Patrick, 180–82
Medicare, 5, 221
Meléndez, Elsa María, 171–72, 181
Menéndez, Robert, 211
Mexico, 92
Miami, 180–81, 184
Miami Herald, 77, 245
Mi Candado Lo Tranco Yo, 326
migration, ix, 3, 12, 129–30, 161, 163, 174, 182, 236, 238, 313
Milwaukee Bucks, 218
Minet, Carla, 3, 13, 218
Mississippi, 239
Molina, Carlos, 68–69
Molinari, Sarah, 10, 15
Monarch Alternative Capital, 215
Morales, Ed, 15
Moriviví, 167–68
Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility, 129
Mother Jones, 129
MSNBC, 114
Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, 220
Muñoz, Benjamin, 132
Muñoz Marín, Luis, 266
Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Puerto Rico, 162, 170, 172, 174
The Museum of the Old Colony, 172
Museum of Contemporary Art of Chicago, 195
Museum of the Americas, 178
Nasio, Juan David, 273
National Flood Insurance Program, 294
National Guard, 156
National Strike, 143
Negrón-Muntaner, Frances, 11
Nelson, Bill, 115
New England Journal of Medicine, 151
New Jersey, ix, 86, 119, 121
New Orleans, 22–24, 32, 121
New Progressive Party, 142
New Reality Social, 164–65
New York, ix, 28, 86, 115, 121, 180–81, 186, 214, 216
New Yorker, 29
New York Times, 114, 139, 162, 218–19, 234
New York University, 239
New Zealand, 29
NFL, 87
Nieto, Ana Luisa, 327
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 178
Nieves, Ida, 84
Nieves, Ramón Luis, 217
Nieves Rodriguez, Christine, 26
Noboa, Patricia, 13
North America, 99
North Carolina, 86
NotiCel, 66
NotiUno, 66
NPR, 22, 37, 77
El Nuevo Día, 86, 91, 287, 319–20
Nyhan, Brendan, 114

Obama, Barack, 211, 219, 221
Ojeda Ríos, Filiberto, 321
Old San Juan, 107
On the Natural History of Destruction, 90
Oppenheimer Funds, 213
Orlando, 132
Orocovis, 34, 75

Palabras en libertad, 319
Palo Seco, 303
Paris, 227
Partido Socialista Puertorriqueño, 322
Patillas, 84
Paulson, John, 214–15
Peinado, Fernando, 120
Pence, Mike, 23
Penchi, Luis, 67
Pennsylvania, 86
Peñuelas, 303
Pérez Leroux, Ana Teresa, 319
Pérez Otero, Maritza, 39–40
Perry Corp, 219
Peru, 92
Pesquera, Héctor, 65
Philadelphia, 217
Philippines, 227
Picasso, Pablo, 196
Picking up the Pieces, 199
Pietri, Pedro, x, 191
“PM,” 181–82
Politico, 86–87
Ponce, 67, 147, 149, 313
Portrait of Natalie Jaresko, 169
Portraits, from the Untitled Series on Puerto Rico Financial Oversight and Management
    Board Members, A Protest, 169
The Potato Eaters, 196
Prado, Eva, 15, 22
Prats, Roberto, 217
PREPA Group, 217
Princeton University, 299
Project 4,645, 151
PROMESA, xi, 7–8, 25, 161, 171, 186, 211, 215–21, 230, 232, 235–36, 240, 263, 265,
    268, 320, 323
PR-tifacts, 199
Puerta de Tierra, 107, 192
Puertopia, 24, 27
Puerto Rican Agenda of Chicago, 192–93
Puerto Rican College of Physicians and Surgeons, 271
Puerto Rican Cultural Center, 193
Puerto Rican Electric Power Authority, 182, 217, 224, 299–303
Puerto Rican flag, 26, 168, 173, 237
Puerto Rican Nationalist Party, 15, 263–67
“Puerto Ricans Underwater,” 181
Puerto Rico, 182, 199, 332–40. See also colonialism; commonwealth status; debt;
   democracy; education
   Afro–Puerto Rican community in, 175
   art scene in, 162, 167, 170, 178, 180–81, 195
   ¡Ay, María! tour in, 39, 41
   bonds and, 6, 31, 213–14, 217, 220–21, 228, 235, 242–43, 252–53
   budget of, 186, 230
   citizen’s audit movement of, 250–53
   commonwealth status of, 254, 264
   creditors of, 169, 214–15, 217–19, 231, 252, 268
   crisis of imagination and, 26
   cultural struggles in, 171
   currency of, 212
   dependency and, 166
   disaster capitalism in, 11, 23
   economic depression in, 224–25
   electrical grid of, 113, 128, 149, 154, 182–83, 211, 241, 300–4, 328
   environmental activism in, 24
   FBI in, 321
   FOMB and, 217
   hate violence in, 327
   housing in, 276, 282, 288–91, 298
   human rights in, 320, 326, 330
   Hurricane Irma and, 65–66, 139, 191, 241, 250, 269, 276
   identity in, 12, 138, 162, 186, 188
   independence for, 264
   Klein and, 21
labor activism in, 24
land titles in, 85
local government of, 5–7, 9–10, 67–68, 77–78, 83–84, 194, 214–15, 225, 228–29, 314,
    323–24
media and, 120, 124–25, 128, 130–33, 152–53, 193, 195, 224, 234, 285, 325, 339
media in, 74–78, 91
mental health care, 274
migrants unable to return to, 1
military and, 325–26
montaña region of, 310
netherworld status of, 212, 221
nonprofit organizations in, 320
perpetual mourning in, 70
poets in, 236–37
police in, 319–23, 328–29
political crisis in, 26
political disempowerment in, xii
political parties in, 15, 263–67, 321–22
post-María migration from, xi, 1–2, 29, 36, 126, 128–31, 145, 161, 188, 242
pre-María migration from, 8, 129–30
protests in, 8, 26, 30–32, 143, 320, 323–24
radio stations in, 66
recession in, 5
reconstruction in, 176, 186–87, 198
recovery funding for, 86–87, 119, 222, 230, 337
referendum in, 142, 183
resignation in, 87–88
resistance in, 164, 315–16, 322
self-determination and, 15–16
Spanish-American War and, 227
state functions in, 28
statehood and, 25, 117, 119, 142, 216–17, 235
tax haven in, 8–9, 31, 213–14
trauma doctrine in, 26
Trump and, 35–36, 120
wages in, 216, 239
Walmart in, 115, 117–18
“Puerto Rico: Defying Darkness,” 181
Puerto Rico Department of Education, 145, 286
Puerto Rico Department of Housing, 282, 288–89, 291
Puerto Rico Law 97 of 2015, 251
Puerto Rico Police Department, 319, 321
“Puerto Rico se levanta,” 274
Puerto Rico Senate, 267
Puerto Rico Telecommunications Regulatory Board, 66
Puerto Rico v. Franklin California Tax-Free Trust, et al, 265
Puerto Rico v. Sanchez Valle, 265
Punta Santiago, 273

Quartz, 76–77
Quijano, Aníbal, 338
Quiles, Digna, 198–201
Quiñones, Francisco, 69

Radio Isla, 66
Raft of the Medusa, 196
Ramírez, Efren, 310–11
Ramírez, Marianne, 14
Rand, Ayn, 28
Rebuild Comerío, 180, 187–88
Red Cross, 278
Red de Apoyo Mutuo, 315
Renaissance, 181–82
Republican Party, 23, 36, 119–21, 220–1
Residents’ Association, 286–87, 294
“Rican Renaissance,” 193
Río Grande de Loíza, 275
Rivera, Christopher, 182
Rivera, Nelson, 169
Rivera Santana, Carlos, 14
Roberto, Giovanni, 10, 15
Robin Hood Foundation, 214
Rocinante, 41
Rodríguez Cotto, Sandra, 15
Rodríguez, Erika, 12, 170
Rodríguez-García, Jesús, 67
Rodríguez, Rosaura, 166–67
Roman, Adrian, 14
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 116, 213, 267
Rosario, Juan, 24
Rosario Lozada, Miguel, 287
Rosselló, Beatriz, 65
Rosselló, Pedro, 237
Rosselló, Ricardo, 28, 65, 67, 69–70, 88, 114, 142
   on death toll, 74, 76
   on debt, 235, 252
   on education, 236
Ruiz Belvis, Segundo, 167
Russian, 219
Rutgers University, ix–x, xii, 195
Ryan, Paul, 230

Sabana Grande, 107
Salas Rivera, Raquel, 8, 80, 205, 208
Sánchez, Juan, 181
Sánchez, Rubén, 66
Sanders, Bernie, 211
San Juan, 24, 63, 68, 148, 151, 174, 182, 197, 303
    airport in, xi
    assassination in, 321
    ¡Ay María! in, 38–39
    bankruptcy court in, 221
    capitol building in, 170
    countryside and, 107
    FOMB and, 217–18
    Hato Rey, 142, 143
    investigative journalism in, 73
    mayor of, 87, 159
    protests in, 323
    public art in, 168, 182
    Puerta de Tierra, 146
    Río Piedras, 91, 309, 321
San Lorenzo, 41
San Sebastian, 198
San Sebastián, 107
Santiago, Richard, 14, 181
Santos, Sarabel, 166
Santurce, 73, 139
School of Business Administration, 312
Scientific American, 129
Sebald, W. G., 90
Serrano, José, 115
Shah, Anushka, 120
Shell, 182
Shock Doctrine, 22
Sierra, Garvin, 173
Silicon Valley, 28, 31
Skyviews, 165
Small Business Administration, 294
Sobrevivientes, 199–201
Sosa Pascual, Omaya, 73–74, 76
Soto, José “Chemo,” 275
Spain, x, 30, 181–82, 212, 220, 227, 231, 264
Spanish-American War, 227, 231
Starbucks, 182
Stone Lion Capital, 243
Superdome, 22
Swain, Laura Taylor, 221

Techo, 278
Teen Vogue, 129
El Telégrafo, 73
Temporada, 166–67
Tenemos sed, 179, 185–86
Tenerife, 101
Texas, 85–86, 115, 119–20, 222, 289
Theater of the Oppressed, 39
“The Frailty of Strength and Vice-Versa,” 193–95
Thiel, Peter, 28, 29
Tilden Park, 252
Tirado, Yiyo, 165
Toa Baja, 1
Torres Ferrer, Gabriella, 179, 181
Torres, Gabriella, 182–83
Torres Gotay, Benjamín, 12–13
Torres, Ismael, 67
Torres Martinó, José, 237
Torres, Sandra, 66
Trump, Donald, 40, 70, 114–115, 337
    on “Americans,” 117
    casinos of, 220
    on death toll, 3–4
    media and, 35–36, 325
    paper towels and, xii, 174, 181
    policy of neglect of, 212
    in Puerto Rico, 92, 120
    welfare and, 221
    Yulín Cruz and, 87, 159
Tu Hogar Renace, 289–91

Umpierre, Migdalia, 163–64
United Nations, 129, 130, 230, 232
United States, 138–39, 314, 334. See also citizenship; colonialism
   art scene in, 162, 167, 181
   bank bailouts in, 219
   capital investment in Puerto Rio of, 6
   corporations in, 213, 267
   cultural struggles in, 171
   education and, 242
   financial control boards in, 216
   fossil fuels and, 304
   ignorance in, 32, 113
   imperialism of, 13, 25, 98–99
   invasion of Puerto Rico by, 88
   Jones Act and, 212
   media and, 68, 74, 77, 114, 116, 193, 339
   migration to, xi, 1, 8, 126, 145, 161, 188, 281
   mortgage market in, 215
   national anthem of, 87
   nationalism in, 119, 132
   occupation of Puerto Rico, x
   products of, 290
   Puerto Rican Nationalist Party on, 15
   Puerto Rican population in, x, 161, 181, 339
   racism in, 33
   recovery funding and, 86, 186, 337
   referendum on, 142, 183
   resignation with, 85
   Rosselló and, 28
   “safe” in, 126
   Santos in, 166
   social safety nets and, 5
   Spanish-American War and, 227, 231
   wages in, 216
   welfare and, 221
   Young Lords in, 316
Universidad de Puerto Rico, x, 7, 102, 171, 234–41, 243, 283, 309, 311–13
Universidad de Sagrado Corazón, 313
University of Massachusetts, 195
University of Michigan, 306
University of Phoenix, 243
Univision Radio, 66
Urbe a Pie, 313
US Congress, 115–16, 118, 121, 139, 217, 219, 265, 266, 310
   PROMESA and, 7, 11, 161, 211, 230, 232, 235, 268
US Constitution, 116, 252, 265–67
US Department of Education, 236, 239
US Forest Service, 299
US Health and Human Services, 74
US House of Representatives Committee on Natural Resources, 303
US Internal Revenue Code, 213
US Navy, 309
US Supreme Court, 25, 232, 263, 265–67
US Virgin Islands, 120
Utuado, 82–83, 107, 143, 149, 156–60, 271, 299

Valencia, Coco, 174–75
Valentín, Luis, 73
Valle Hill Community Board, 276
Valora tu mentira americana, 179, 182–83
“Vamos pa’lante.” 274
van Gogh, Vincent, 196
Van Munster, Rens, 335–36
Vargas Bernard, Rafael, 180, 185–86
Varoufakis, Yanis, 30
Vazquez, Angel Luis, 75
Vega Alta, 166
Vega Baja, 166
Venezuela, 340
Viajero Román, Adrian, 181
Vía Verde, 302–3
Vieques, 107, 309, 314
Vietnam, 116
Vietnam War, x
Vilches Norat, Vanessa, 319
Virginia, 119
Virgin Islands, 139

Walcott, Derek, 124
Walker, Scott, 218
Wall Street, 5–6, 212–14, 218–19, 228, 235
Wall Street Journal, 219–20
Walmart, 115, 117–18
WAPA Radio, 64, 66–68, 71
Washington, DC, ix, 217–18, 303–4, 326
Washington, George, 116
Washington Times, 116
Washington, Tracie, 32–33
Weather Channel, 114
West, Cornel, 337
What Is Psychoanalysis?, 273
Whitefish, 302, 314
White House, 219, 221
Wilfredo, Don, 305
Wisconsin, 218
Wiscovitch, Jeniffer, 74, 76

Yabucoa, 40, 157, 235, 315
Yamaha, 182
Yes!, 129
Yes, Psychoanalysis Cures, 273
Young Lords, 316
Yulín Cruz, Carmen, 87, 159
               ABOUT HAYMARKET BOOKS

Haymarket Books is a radical, independent, nonprofit book publisher based
in Chicago.
    Our mission is to publish books that contribute to struggles for social and
economic justice. We strive to make our books a vibrant and organic part of
social movements and the education and development of a critical, engaged,
international left.
    We take inspiration and courage from our namesakes, the Haymarket
martyrs, who gave their lives fighting for a better world. Their 1886 struggle
for the eight-hour day—which gave us May Day, the international workers’
holiday—reminds workers around the world that ordinary people can
organize and struggle for their own liberation. These struggles continue today
across the globe—struggles against oppression, exploitation, poverty, and
war.
    Since our founding in 2001, Haymarket Books has published more than
five hundred titles. Radically independent, we seek to drive a wedge into the
risk-averse world of corporate book publishing. Our authors include Noam
Chomsky, Arundhati Roy, Rebecca Solnit, Angela Y. Davis, Howard Zinn,
Amy Goodman, Wallace Shawn, Mike Davis, Winona LaDuke, Ilan Pappé,
Richard Wolff, Dave Zirin, Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor, Nick Turse, Dahr
Jamail, David Barsamian, Elizabeth Laird, Amira Hass, Mark Steel, Avi
Lewis, Naomi Klein, and Neil Davidson. We are also the trade publishers of
the acclaimed Historical Materialism Book Series and of Dispatch Books.
Disclaimer
This ebook does not have any technical DRM restrictions
 and may be read on several pc's, ereaders, tablets and
              smartphones

Reselling, uploading to the internet or any other way of
            digital distribution is prohibited.
This eBook contains several visible and invisible marks,
such as name, email address and a transaction code, by
        which illegal distribution can be traced.
